A Cooperative Approach to Lab-Based,
Multi-Team Courses in an iSchool
Carlos E. Caicedo

Aylin Aksu

Walter Cerroni

University of Pittsburgh
135 N. Bellefield Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
+1 412 624 9490

University of Pittsburgh
135 N. Bellefield Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
+1 412 624 9490

University of Bologna
via Venezia, 52
47023 Cesena (FC) - ITALY
+39 0547 339209

ccaicedo@sis.pitt.edu

aaksu@sis.pitt.edu

walter.cerroni@unibo.it

ABSTRACT
The iSchool at the University of Pittsburgh has designed a new
learning experience that will allow future leaders of the
iProfession to gain critical skills and to experience working in
culturally diverse teams. The iSchool has, as one of its missioncritical goals, to create learning experiences that imitate the
collaborative nature of the information professions. To provide
this opportunity and following the advice from industry experts,
our iSchool redesigned the laboratory for teaching and learning
computer networking topics to support hands-on lab experiences
for students as well as the research activities of the iSchool
faculty. However, it goes beyond mere workstations in a lab
space – it is an experiment to create a multi-team environment
that facilitates cooperative approaches to problem solving. It also
requires the students to participate in self-directed learning.
This poster presentation reports how the lab and accompanying
courses were designed to address a key aspect in working in the
information field – how to work as a team to solve a problem.
Although the iSchool created this lab as part of its graduate
program in Telecommunications, the pedagogical aspects of the
lab and curriculum design would be applicable to any discipline
within the information field.
In 2007, the iSchool’s Industry Advisory Council recommended
that the laboratory infrastructure used to teach computer
networking concepts needed to be completely redesigned. The
requirements set forth by the advisory council stated that the labs
should engage students in the use of both current networking
technologies and those to be used in future work environments.
The iSchool took this opportunity to not only redesign the lab,
but to completely reconceptualize the curriculum and the
physical lab layout to support a different kind of teaching
methodology and learning experience. A distributed laboratory
infrastructure was implemented, to achieve an effective teaching
environment for lab-based, multi-team courses that enables
cooperative interaction among the students. This design replaced
the existing centralized layout of the lab, which only allowed one
group of students to work at a time, and helped the integration of
isolated laboratory experiences from many courses into a single,
coherent lab course.

The iSchool retained the services of an international visiting
faculty member who had already developed an innovative labbased networking experience for students in his own country.
The iSchool’s laboratory will primarily be used for a new
networking laboratory course required for graduate students and
offered as an optional senior elective for undergraduate students.
Our iSchool acknowledges the importance of having IS
professionals that can work in teams with people from different
backgrounds and nationalities; thus, the design of the lab course
incorporates these aspects into its structure. The iSchool has a
diverse student population and in this direction the lab
experiences promote the interaction of student teams comprised
of people of different nationalities. In this environment, students
have to adopt communication styles appropriate for the
interactions of future information professionals in a globalized
world.
More specifically, the objective of this lab-based course is to
provide the students with experience on computer networking
topics through hands-on experiments using equipment and
services in lab exercises that promote team-work. During the
course, students will progress with a bottom-up methodology
through increasingly-complex networking concepts, from basic
connections between two PCs to routing to advanced network
applications. Each lab experience is NOT a stand-alone
experience: rather they are structured to incorporate concepts and
knowledge gained by the students in previous exercises. The
course covers topics such as connectivity at the physical layer,
Ethernet and WLAN performance and management, IP address
planning and management, routing protocols, network monitoring
and management, signaling protocols for VoIP services, and webbased services configuration.
In order to promote critical thinking and foster problem solving
skills, the exercises do not force the students to follow a recipelike step-by-step approach. There are no lectures in the course
and the students are supposed to apply the knowledge gained
from previous theoretical courses, integrated with some specific
suggested readings. Furthermore, the requirements for each
exercise are presented as a statement of goals to accomplish.
This mimics the environment that students will deal with in their
profession where they have to do their own research and use their
expertise to solve problems, meet goals and elaborate appropriate

reports while respecting deadlines. Additionally, the course
requires students to specify and undertake a final project which
emphasizes self-driven research and problem solving.
State-of-the-art devices were acquired in order to support these
lab exercises, but that were also in line with the pedagogical
objectives of the lab. The lab facility provides for four
independent workbenches accommodating four students each.
Each workbench has 3 PCs, one laptop and a networking
equipment rack. This will allow students at each workbench to
work together on the assigned problem or design –allowing them
to experience the team approach to problem-solving that exists in
industry. An extra equipment rack in the lab provides
interconnectivity between the four workbenches; thus, allowing
for complex lab exercises where separate teams have to interact.
To support the self-driven approach to learning and problem
solving in this course, the instructor only acts as a supervisor and
a consultant. As a supervisor, he/she demands and expects the
completion of the objectives of each assignment within an agreed
time schedule; however, each team is free to structure the
presentation of results and the level of detail provided. As a
consultant, the instructor provides guidance towards finding the
solution to practical problems a student might encounter during a
lab experiment.

iSchools should give their students more than technical skills and
theoretical knowledge. They should enable the student to
experience and master working in an environment that is everchanging, diverse and relatively unstructured. Our iSchool has
developed and implemented a lab-based course that will
encourage team approaches to problem solving, self-directed
learning, and appropriate communication capabilities for working
in a culturally-diverse setting. We hope our experience can be
useful to other iSchools in the development of courses and
infrastructure with similar objectives.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.2 [Computers and Education]: Computer and Information
Science Education – Information Systems Education

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Team-based experimentation, self-directed learning, laboratory
and curriculum development.

