A Hybrid Approach to Undergraduate LIS Instruction: A
Case Study of Organization of Online Course Information
Sarah T. Roberts
School of Library and Information
Studies, University of WisconsinMadison
600 N. Park St.
Madison, WI 53706
(608) 263-2900

stroberts2@wisc.edu
ABSTRACT
Hybrid courses, a combination of online/asynchronous and inclass/synchronous learning, are relative newcomers among the
different types of course delivery options available to instructors.
Along with them comes the need to develop and organize online
course materials to ensure student participation and success with
the online component, usually fully 50% of the course. A
concurrent recent development is the movement to reintroduce
classes in Library and Information Studies/Science (LIS) directed
toward undergraduates, of which this course was one. This poster
captures one such attempt at piloting and delivering a hybrid
course in the field of Library and Information Studies by
graphically showcasing the different online elements utilized in
the course, their development and organizational implementation.
It then offers analysis, provides a discussion of relevant
theoretical notions and frameworks useful for contextualizing the
observations made, and suggest several areas of and possibilities
for future inquiry.

Topics
What is 'engagement' in a research institution? Information
organization.

Keywords
Undergraduate LIS education, hybrid course, information
organization, online collaborative tools.

1. INTRODUCTION
The advent of collaborative Internet information technologies has
provided instructors in higher education access to tools that have
the potential to greatly broaden learning environments beyond the
traditional barriers of space and time. These new asynchronous
combination in-person/Internet learning environments have given
rise to a new instructional paradigm, known as the hybrid course
[Reasons 2005]. The hybrid course is different from the
traditional classroom model in that it offers both students and
instructor the ability to engage with the course material beyond
the confines of a group meeting at a specified time and place. It
differs, too, from courses considered distance-education, in which
there are few to no physical class meetings at all, replaced instead
by course activities that are held exclusively online.
Hybrid courses, a combination of online/asynchronous and inclass/synchronous learning, are the newest of these pedagogical
models, intended for students who reside and attend class on
campus. A portion of the class does meet in person at a fixed

class time. The other portion of the course time, however, is
consecrated to online activities, usually asynchronous, and
constitutes roughly 45% to 80% of the class activity as a whole,
following the commonly understood definition of the hybrid
course [Smith 2007].
A concurrent recent development is the movement to reintroduce
classes in Library and Information Studies/Science (LIS) directed
toward undergraduates. Since the professionalization of the
library field and the development of the Master’s level curriculum
for library practitioners, many LIS and iSchools ceased to offer an
undergraduate major or courses for undergraduates at all. Yet, in
recent years, this trend has slowly begun a reversal, and some
schools have returned to offering undergraduate classes.

2. PURVIEW
This exploratory inquiry captures one attempt at piloting and
delivering a hybrid LIS undergraduate course focused on the
“Information Society” by showcasing the multiple online course
organizational elements, such as blogs, wikis, and online syllabi,
employed in the course and the modes of informational
engagement fostered by each. A preliminary analysis of the
elements suggests a number of affordances and constraints, both
hard, or technologically imposed, and soft, or socially imposed,
influencing the development of these online course organizational
elements. These include the architecture of the organizational
elements themselves (e.g. the pbWiki platform), conventions of
their use (e.g. what a blog should look like), the relationships and
influence among those charged with their development (e.g. the
role of the instructor and TAs), and the interplay of these factors
with each other.

3. METHODOLOGY
The methodology employed in this case study consisted of
elements of both participant observation, a relative newcomer to
the research methodologies favored by LIS researchers [Baker
2006] and grounded theory [Glaser 1978 and Pace 2004]
particularly instructive when formulating a burgeoning research
agenda, launching a preliminary inquiry or examining relatively
new or unstudied phenomena . The methods complemented each
other, allowing for access, and offering qualitative, inductive
approaches particularly useful at the nascent development stage of
a research agenda and for generating conceptual observations and
theories.

4. CONTEXT
At the University of Wisconsin-Madison, a large Midwestern
Research I university with a School of Library and Information
Studies, a pilot undergraduate LIS class was launched in the fall
semester of 2008. The course, entitled “The Information
Society,” or LIS 201, was envisioned and designed as a hybrid
course, with approximately 50% of its content to be delivered in
in-person settings, and the other 50% to be delivered in several
different online contexts and using several different organizational
elements to engage or disseminate information to students.

5. ANALYSIS
Three actors, their influences and their series of identifiable
affordances and constraints, some loose and some strict, informed
the information organization of the course within and across its
disparate online elements. Each of these independent actors
functioned in relation to the other two in a dynamic process of
exerting influence on each other with regard to the organizational
structure of the course. The poster provides graphical examples
of the elements themselves and illustrates the relationships and
influence among the three actors.
The first actor influencing course information organization was
the course instructor. The instructor’s influence functioned in
strict terms, when he directed the TAs to integrate specific
information, information types (e.g. links) or organizational
elements (e.g. a schedule) into their own online course elements.
But there was also influence in the form of loose constraints on
the part of the instructor, who was the first to create both the main
course and section-specific blogs and wikis, which TAs could
then use as a model. Given the instructor’s authority role vis-à-vis
the TAs, the influence of his organizational structure on the
creation of the TAs’ own should not be downplayed.
A second actor was the group of online course organizational
elements themselves. Both the specific architectural parameters of
the chosen Internet-based software tools and the conventions for
their use for use influenced the information organization within
them, with relative strictness and looseness of those factors
varying among the elements.
The final actor exerting influence on course information in LIS
201 was its TAs, acting individually and collectively. Despite
being granted relative free rein, the TA-created blogs and wikis
were structured in remarkably similar ways.
This like
organization can be partially ascribed to the constraints of the
software platforms, but the striking similarities the architecturally
liberal elements (e.g. wikis) points to social phenomena of peer
influence, collegial relationships and trust.

6. OUTCOMES
The poster identifies several directions for further inquiry,
including qualitative measurement of student engagement,
satisfaction, perceived success or failure with regard to the course
online elements and their organization.
Another approach to move from qualitative to quantitative
investigation could include the coding of qualitative observations
already developed. For example, attempts could be made to
quantify the ways in which the actors interacted with and exerted
influence on each other.
One other avenue for potential future research could involve a
more extensive use of the SI framework to engage with and

understand the role of social relationships in the development of
hybrid courses and their organizational elements. For this
examination, the importance of the relationships among the course
TAs could be explored within the context of SI and related
notions, somewhat reconfigured, of social capital [Widén-Wulff
2004], trust [Cheshire 2004], and “social communication norms,
group communication expectations, perceived cost and value of
communication and the presence or absence of other
communication tools” [Sawyer 2005].
Undertaking these and similar future inquiries could yield tangible
outcomes for hybrid courses delivery, for “it is unclear whether
the previously noted literature documents efforts to give students
options to learn based on their needs or efforts to allow instructors
the chance to use formats that meet their needs” [Reasons 2005].
Relative student success or failure may depend on which tools are
chosen, how information is organized within those tools, and
students’ ability to understand, interact with, manage and produce
new information within the online organizational framework
provided them.
This poster is meant as the beginning of a dialog relevant to
educators and researchers in education, LIS, SI and related fields.
Its preliminary observations and their potential for future inquiry
could help identify the factors influencing levels of student
success or failure – a tipping point - based on how online elements
are organized. Future hybrid courses could therefore be designed
with that tipping point in mind, allowing students the challenge of
engaging with organizationally complex and disparate online
elements without becoming so bogged down in their attempts that
other learning objectives are not achieved.

7. REFERENCES
[1] L.M Baker, “Observation: a complex research method,”
Library Trends , 55(1), 171-189, 2006.
[2] C. Cheshire and K.S. Cook, “The Emergence of Trust
Networks under Uncertainty–Implications for Internet
Interactions,” Analyse & Kritik , 26, 220-240, 2004.
[3] B.G. Glaser, Theoretical Sensitivity: Advances in the
Methodology of Grounded Theory , Mill Valley, Calif:
Sociology Press, 1978.
[4] S. Pace, “A grounded theory of the flow experiences of
Web users,” International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies , 60(3), 327-363, 2004.
[5] S.G. Reasons, K. Valadares, and M. Slavkin, “Questioning
the Hybrid Model: Student Outcomes in Different Course
Formats,” Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks ,
9(1), 83-94, 2005.
[6] S. Sawyer, “Social Informatics: Overview, principles and
opportunities,” Bulletin of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 31(5), 2005.
[7] G.G. Smith and H. Kurthen, “Front-Stage and Back-Stage in
Hybrid E-Learning Face-to-Face Courses,” International
Journal on E-Learning, 6(3), 455-474, 2007.
[8] Widén-Wulff, G. and M. Ginman, "Explaining knowledge
sharing inorganizations through the dimensions of social
capital," Journal of Information Science, 30(5), 448-458,
2004.

