A socio-epistemic approach to identify communities of
scientific collaboration
Alberto Pepe
Department of Information Studies
University of California, Los Angeles

apepe@ucla.edu
ABSTRACT
The processes that drive collaboration in scientific environments are embedded within the social, technical, cultural
and epistemic practices of the constituent research communities. This poster presents a methodology to unpack specific social and epistemic dimensions of scientific collaboration using, as a case study, a “little science” research center:
the Center for Embedded Networked Sensing (CENS).
CENS is a National Science Foundation venture involved in
the development and application of wireless sensing systems
to critical scientific and societal pursuits. CENS consists of
scholars at all levels (faculty, scientists, engineers, graduate
and undergraduate students) from five member institutions
with a headquarter base located at the University of California, Los Angeles. The type of research conducted at CENS
spans across a wide spectrum of disciplines and applications
(from biology to seismology, from wireless telecommunications to statistics) requiring continuous cooperation among
participating researchers. Unlike ”Big science” collaborations [3], such as those typically found in many high energy
physics and observational astronomy laboratories, CENS is
a typical ”little science” research center: CENS research does
not require continuous use of massive amounts of human and
computational resources. Yet, similar to big science endeavors, CENS research is highly collaborative and relies heavily
on information and communication technologies. Since multiple disciplines intersect at CENS, multiple scholarly and
scientific practices of collaboration exist. Despite such multitude of practices, a collaborative activity that is performed
across the entire spectrum of disciplines is the production
and publication of scholarly artifacts in the form of conference papers and journal articles. Scholarly publication is
entrenched in the modus operandi of engineers, natural scientists, statisticians, computer scientists and life scientists
alike and thus depicts very well the extent and arrangement
of scientific collaboration at CENS.

In this poster, I present the methods by which the scholarly
output of CENS researchers can be analyzed to identify communities of collaboration using a socio-epistemic approach.
I employ the entire historical bibliographic record of CENS,
consisting of over 600 manuscripts, authored by nearly 300
authors over a period of 7 years: from the inception of CENS
to present day (2002-2008). I construct two networks of scientific collaboration:
1. a social network of coauthorship, linking individuals
that have coauthored scholarly artifacts (journal articles and conference papers). This consists of a weighted
network in which each author of a scholarly item, represented by a node, is connected to another author,
represented by another node, if a coauthorship event
exists.
2. a social epistemic network of intellectual relationship,
linking individuals who have utilized identical or related concepts, keyphrases, and knowledge constructs
in their scholarly production. A social epistemic network can be intended as an extension of an “epistemic
network” — a network describing associations between
the many heterogeneous entities that lead to the construction of scientific facts into an array that is “strong
and durable” [2, 4]. The social epistemic network consists of a weighted network in which authors, represented by nodes, are connected with one another if
they have employed similar or related topics in their
scholarly production.
This poster reports on ongoing work directed at the analysis
of the structure and evolution of these networks of scientific
interaction. In particular, I introduce a theoretical framework to analyze the community structures of these networks
of scientific collaboration from a socio-epistemic perspective.
I employ a popular community detection mechanism, Newman’s leading eigenvector algorithm [5], to identify communities of collaborating researchers in the two aforementioned
networks. This method computes the repartition of the network in structural communities based on the vertices’ eigenvector centrality [1]. Each community repartition captures
a different structural arrangement. I present the results of a
preliminary comparative analysis aimed at delineating structural differences among the detected configurations of communities of scientific collaboration. This work is expected
to determine how social and epistemic networks of scientific collaboration, constructed from the same bibliographic

data, interface with each other. Moreover, it will provide a
platform for future work aimed at the investigation of the
relationship between communities of collaboration and given
organizational, disciplinary, and institutional arrangements
of scientific research.

Keywords
social studies of science, laboratory studies, social networks,
community detection, epistemic networks, socio-epistemic
analysis, scientific collaboration

1.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Bonacich. Power and centrality: A family of
measures. American Journal of Sociology,
92(5):1170–1182, 1987.
[2] M. Callon, J. Law, and A. Rip. Qualitative
scientometrics. In M. Callon, J. Law, and A. Rip,
editors, Mapping the dynamics of science and
technology. London: Macmillan., 1986.
[3] D. J. de Solla Price. Little Science, Big Science.
Columbia University Press., 1963.
[4] L. Leydesdorff. In search of epistemic networks. Social
Studies of Science, 21(1):75–110, 1991.
[5] M. E. J. Newman. Finding community structure in
networks using the eigenvectors of matrices. Physical
Review E, 74, 2006.

