Are You Looking At Me? - Social Media and
Privacy Literacy
Dana Rotman
drotman@umd.edu
College of Information Studies
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

ABSTRACT
Information privacy has received significant
attention in past years. The shift from physical to
online interaction entails a change in privacy
paradigms. Yet, most of the attention has been
directed at forms of self-identifying information (e.g.
health records and financial information); less
attention has been given to privacy concerns
resulting from the information provided voluntarily
by users during online social interaction. This paper
suggests privacy literacy - an educational
framework that will be used to enhance users'
awareness to privacy issues that are intertwined in
online exposure.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.2 Computer and Information Science
Education/Literacy

General Terms
Human Factors

Keywords
Social media, Online communities, Privacy literacy,
Self-disclosure

1. INTRODUCTION
Social media are extremely popular, and draw large
numbers of users. Online communities, social
networks media-sharing sites and blogs are all based
on the premise of information exchange, creating a
sense of intimacy, based on the relative anonymity
and lack of prior acquaintance with other users [1].
This intimacy causes people to open themselves up
to a dialog with unfamiliar and undefined audience.
The information shared in this dialog shapes the
way a user's identity is created, recreated and
refined [2, 3]. This information can be divided to 3
facets:
(1) Self-identifying information (e.g. health and
financial records, SSN);
(2) Access-enabling information (passwords,
location); and

(3) Expressive information (opinions, views and
lifestyle choices)[4]. The fragmented pieces of
information present facets of the online self, and
may lead to an almost-complete portrayal of the user
[5, 6]. The ability of users to consciously select
which information to disclose and which will be
kept private is the basis for their self-governance
and autonomy [6]. Yet, in many online social media
this autonomy is inadvertently mitigated during
social interactions.

2. SOCIAL MEDIA AND
PRIVACY CONCERNS
Many social media tools are supported by
technology that enables the collection and retention
of large bodies of information for indefinite periods
of time. Websites employ repositories, archives and
wikis, in which user-generated-content, including
personal information, is collected and stored
indefinitely, in a manner that enables search and
retrieval or harvesting by commercial applications
and private queries. The combination of an extreme
sense of intimacy and mass data storage, with little
or no user-control, is a valid reason for concern.
Table 1. Level of privacy concerns arising from
different online social interactions
Media type

Identifying
information

Access
enabling
information

Expressive
information

Online
communities
Blogs / Vlogs
Photos
Social
tagging
Social
networking
sites
Video
sharing

99

9

999

99
9
9

9
9

999
999

999

99

99

99

9

99

However, prior studies [7-13] have shown that few
users are aware of the fact that the social
information they willingly provide can be stored
indefinitely, or misused in a wide range of
unwarranted activities, from identity theft [14] to
online bullying [15].

Solutions to privacy concerns related to social
media stem from several sources – policy, design
and social settings [16]. We suggest privacy literacy:
an educational framework that will complement the
two other sources of privacy protection, and aid in
creating proactive and aware users.

3. PRIVACY LITERACY
Privacy literacy may be viewed as a sub-category of
digital literacy [17], or as a complementing literacy.
Prior research stressed education as a literacy
promoting tool [7, 18]. Thus, a privacy-literate user
should be educated to distinguish between different
facets of personal information; familiar with the
settings in which he/she will readily relinquish
personal information and those in which
information should not be disclosed; understand the
limitations of online anonymity; aware of the threats
– immediate and prospective – that may stem from
information disclosure, and take precautions against
over-exposure.
A privacy literacy framework should include 5
elements that iteratively complement and enhance
one another. These are:

5. Deciding – the last element of privacy literacy is
deciding consciously which information to share, in
which circumstances. This is a proactive step, taken
by the educated user, based on his/her knowledge
and understanding of the range of privacy issues.

Online social interaction

Understanding
The characteristics of the
different facets of
information

Recognizing
Online social interaction
as a venue for potential
threats to privacy

Realizing
The possible outcome of
information disclosed in
online social interaction

Evaluating

1. Understanding - the different contexts of privacy
in the personal information spectrum, and their
place in online interaction: self-identifying
information
differs
from
access-enabling
information, and this, in turn, differs from
expressive information. Each has a different role in
social interactions, and their interplay should be
known and understood.
2. Recognizing – various online places in which
personal information is shared. Most users are
familiar with circumstances in which identifying
information is disclosed. They are less familiar with
the outcome of online social interactions, and
readily reveal themselves visually and emotionally
on different social media. Comprehending that
almost every online social interaction entails a
certain level of exposure will lead to greater
awareness of the implications of such exposure.
3. Realizing - the implications of sharing private
information in social circumstances. Even
computer-savvy users can be confounded by the
endless possibilities for privacy infringements that
may occur during online social interaction - photos
of a user partying during college can reach a
potential employer; a personal message on an online
community or a blog can be read by unwarranted
audience. The realization of how far-reaching and
how long-lasting social information is, should direct
users when interacting online.
4. Evaluating – possible threats to privacy in a given
interaction. This is possible when the user is
knowledgeable enough and is able to asses the
benefit and cost that he/she will incur from specific
disclosure. It is also a matter of personal choice,
based on the user's specific privacy and exposure
preferences.

Possible threats to privacy
in a given social
interaction

Deciding
How and when to divulge
information within the
online social interaction

Figure 1. Privacy literacy framework.

4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
RESEARCH
Protecting privacy, and especially social privacy, is
not an easy feat. It is a delicate and continuous task.
The variety of social media applications that are
available today, and the heterogeneous nature of
social media consumers, lessen the ability to suggest
one solution to fit all.
Educating users to be privacy literate is not merely
making them realize that online personal privacy
encompasses much more than formal record
protection; nor that information which is shared
during social interaction may harm privacy. It is
creating the essential understanding of what may
become of this information online; the fact that
loose boundaries exist as to the retention and use of
the data, and the proactive choice of a desired level
of privacy. Privacy literacy will have to be reevaluated against users’ perception of online
information sharing, and refined with time and
changes in online social interaction, especially
where locative services are used. Behavior patterns
that could not have been foreseen a decade ago,
such as voluntary exposure of personal images and
locative information, are now prevalent and
necessitate different privacy literacy skills. Future
research would address the issue of shifting privacy

literacy paradigms within social media, and
especially mobile-social-media, as well as examine
specific educational programs that will help make
users privacy literate.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Preece, J., Abras, C. and Maloney-Krichmar, D.
2004.Designing and evaluating online communities:
research speaks to emerging practice. International
Journal of Web Based Communities, 1(1), 2-18.
[2] Donath, J. 1998. Identity and deception in the
virtual community. Routledge, London.
[3] Turkle, S. 1997. Multiple Subjectivity and
Virtual Community at the End of the Freudian
Century. Sociological Inquiry, 67, 1, 72-84.
[4] DeCew, W. J. 1997. In Pursuit of Privacy: Law,
Ethics & the Rise of Technology. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca.
[5] Burkhalter, B. 1999. Reading Race Online:
Discovering Racial Identity in Usenet Discussions.
Routledge, London,.
[6] Floridi, L. 2006. Four Challenges for a Theory
of Informational Privacy. Ethics and Information
Technology, 8, (3), 109-119.
[7] Goldie, J. L. 2006. Virtual Communities and the
Social Dimension of Privacy. University of Ottawa
Law & Technology Journal, 3(1), 133-167.
[8] Miyazaki, A. D. and Fernandez, A. 2001.
Consumer Perceptions of Privacy and Security
Risks for Online Shopping. Journal of Consumer
Affairs, 35, 1, 27-44.
[9] Dinev, T. and Hart, P. 2006. Internet Privacy
Concerns and Social Awareness as Determinants of
Intention to Transact. International Journal of
Electronic Commerce, 10(2) ,7-29.
[10] Qian, H. and Scott, C. R. Anonymity and selfdisclosure on weblogs. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication, 12, 4), 14.
[11] Romanosky, S., Acquisti, A., Hong, J., Cranor,
L. F. and Friedman, B. 2006. Privacy patterns for
online interactions. In Proceedings of the 2006
conference on Pattern languages of programs
Portland, Oregon, October 21 - 23, 2006). PLoP '06.
ACM, New York, NY, 1-9.
[12] Madden, M., Fox, S., Smith, A. and Vitak, J.
2007. Digital Footprints - Online identity
management and search in the age of transparency.
Pew Internet & American Life Project, Washington,
DC.
[13] Ahern, S., Eckles, D., Good, N. S., King, S.,
Naaman, M. and Nair, R. 2007. Over-exposed?:
privacy patterns and considerations in online and
mobile photo sharing. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA,
April 28 - May 03, 2007). CHI '07. ACM, New
York, NY, 357-366.
[14] Spiekermann, S., Grossklags, J. and Berendt, B.
2001. E-privacy in 2nd generation E-commerce:
privacy preferences versus actual behavior. In
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on
Electronic Commerce (Tampa, Florida, USA,
October 14 - 17, 2001). EC '01. ACM, New York,
NY, 38-47.
[15] Gross, R. and Acquisti , A. 2005. Information
revelation and privacy in online social networks. In

Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Privacy in
the Electronic Society, November 2005
[16] Ackerman, M., Darrell, T. and Weitzner, D. J.
2001. Privacy in Context. Human-Computer
Interaction, 16 (2), 167 - 176.
[17] Gilster, P. 1997. Digital Literacy. John Weily
and Sons, New York, NY.
[18] Sheehan, K. B. 2002. Toward a Typology of
Internet Users and Online Privacy Concerns. The
Information Society, 18 (1), 21 - 32.

