Balancing User Privacy Concerns in the Adoption of Location-Based Services:
An Empirical Analysis across Pull-Based and Push-Based Applications
Heng Xu

Sumeet Gupta

Pan Shi

College of Information Sciences and Technology
Pennsylvania State University
hxu@ist.psu.edu

Shri Shankaracharya College of
Engineering and Technology, India
sumeetguptadr@gmail.com

College of Information Sciences and Technology
Pennsylvania State University
pzs125@ist.psu.edu

ABSTRACT
Location-Based Services (LBS) bring unprecedented mobility and
personalization value to nomadic individuals and hence carry
great commercial potential. However, the commercial potential of
LBS is obscured by the user’s concerns for privacy whereby the
LBS provider can misuse the confidential personal information of
users and in extreme circumstances place an individual in danger
or seriously jeopardize his or her social life or finances.
Therefore, we study the adoption of LBS through a privacy
calculus lens. Privacy calculus argues that individuals, when
requested to provide personal information to corporations,
perform a cost-benefit analysis to assess the outcomes they would
face in return for the information, and respond accordingly. We
study both pull-based and push-based LBS to have a
comprehensive view of LBS adoption. The results of the study
reveal that individual’s privacy concerns influence their intention
to adopt directly in case of push-based LBS and indirectly in case
of pull-based services. The implications for theory and practice
are discussed.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.4 [Social and Behavioral Sciences]: Psychology; K.4.4
[Electronic Commerce]: Security; H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]:
Human factors.

General Terms
Management, Security, Human Factors.

Keywords
Location-Based Services (LBS), Location Commerce (LCommerce), Privacy Calculus, Technology Adoption

1. INTRODUCTION
Location-Based Services (LBS) use positioning technologies to
provide individual users with reachability and accessibility that
would otherwise not be available in the conventional commercial
realm. In the literature, LBS are defined as network-based
services that integrate a derived estimate of a mobile device’s
location or position with other information so as to provide added
value to the user [25, 41]. These services include emergency and
safety-related services, location-sensitive billing, entertainment,
navigation, asset tracking, directory and city
guides, traffic
updates, and location-based advertising [4, 25]. Among various
LBS applications, those commercial location-sensitive services
that utilize geographical positioning information to provide valueadded services are generally marketed under the term ‘LocationCommerce’ or ‘L-Commerce’ [20]. The importance of LBS has

increased more today than anytime earlier because they bring
unprecedented mobility and personalization value to mobile user.
The growth trajectory of LBS is striking. According to a recent
report from Allied Business Intelligence Inc., LBS revenues are
expected to reach an annual global total of $13.3 billion by 2013,
up from an estimated $515 million during 2007 [1].
Acknowledging the market potential, some operators, such as
KDDI and NTT DoCoMo in Japan and E-Plus in Germany,
have made LBS a core part of their strategy and are focusing on
deploying accurate location technology and services as a
differentiation mechanism. Unsurprisingly, the commercial
potential and rapid growth of L-Commerce have been
accompanied by concerns regarding the collection and
dissemination of individual information by service providers and
merchants. These concerns pertain to the confidentiality of
accumulated individual data [58] and the potential risks that
individuals experience over the possible breach of confidentiality
[5]. In extreme circumstances, improper handling of location
information can place an individual in danger or seriously
jeopardize her social life or finances. The convenience of LBS
notwithstanding, individuals worry about such privacy intrusions
– the Big Brother imagery [43] looms in the popular press where
LBS is discussed [36]. To the degree that privacy concerns
represent a major inhibiting factor in individuals’ adoption of LCommerce [11], it is important to respond to the call of “No LCommerce without L-Privacy” [26] by addressing the role of
privacy in the adoption of L-Commerce.
The notion that there may be both positive and negative
consequences accruing from LBS usage is implicit in the idea of
‘privacy calculus’ [13] in the information privacy literature. The
concept of privacy calculus argues that individuals, when
requested to provide personal information to corporations, would
perform a cost-benefit analysis to assess the outcomes they would
face in return for the information, and respond accordingly [13,
14]. This proposition of privacy calculus provides impetus for us
to develop and test a research model with contrary factors
capturing elements of privacy calculus. Relatively, the model
developed here attempts to understand the delicate balance
between individual privacy concerns and instrumental values that
influence behavioral intentions to adopt LBS. In addition,
acknowledging that LBS in different forms yield distinct benefits
and privacy costs for individuals [26, 58], we test our model
using two types of LBS. Particularly, we study pull-based LBS,
in which individuals request information and services based on
their locations, and push-based LBS, in which location-sensitive
content is automatically sent to individuals based on tracking
their locations.
The study reported here is novel to the extent that existing
empirical research has not examined this complex set of inter-

factors capturing a set of elements in a calculus in which users
make a delicate balance between privacy concerns, learning costs,
and instrumental values that influence behavioral intentions to
adopt LBS.

related issues in the LBS context. The synthesis of privacy
literature and technology adoption theories may provide a rich
understanding of the adoption of technologies that create personal
vulnerabilities, and therefore, inform adoption research in the
Information Systems (IS) discipline. The findings are also
potentially useful to privacy advocates, merchants, and service
providers to help shape or justify their decisions concerning LCommerce. An understanding of individuals’ adoption decisions
in L-Commerce and their privacy concerns is vital for at least two
reasons. First, positioning systems are likely to endure as an
important technology because of the significant investments made
in their development and associated telecommunication
infrastructure [45].
Second, as information technologies
increasingly expand the ability for firms to store, process, and
exploit personal data, insights obtained from this study are likely
to be of value for understanding the adoption of related
technologies such as Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
technology.

2.2. User
Technology

Acceptance

of

Information

Multiple models have been proposed in previous research to
explain the adoption and usage of technology by individuals or
organizations. Venkatesh et al. [55] proposed the Unified Theory
of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) by integrating
elements across eight major user acceptance models (i.e., theory
of reasoned action, technology acceptance model, motivational
model, theory of planned behavior, a combined theory of planned
behavior/technology acceptance model, model of PC utilization,
innovation diffusion theory, and social cognitive theory).
According to UTAUT, four key constructs determine technology
usage intention and behavior: performance expectancy, effort
expectancy, social influence and facilitating conditions. Also,
individual level factors (e.g., gender, age, experience and
voluntariness of use) are posited to moderate the impact of the
key constructs on usage intention and behavior. Based on
empirical tests, Venkatesh et al. [55] demonstrated that their
model accounted for 70% of the variance in usage intention,
substantially greater than any of the extant user acceptance
models when tested on the same data.

The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. We first present the
theoretical background, describe the conceptual foundations of
the proposed model, and develop research hypotheses. This is
followed by a discussion of the research method, including scale
development and validation, and the experiment. Next, we
present results in support of the psychometric properties of the
measures and the hypothesis tests. The paper concludes with a
discussion of the findings, research limitations, and implications
for future research.

Consistently, our investigation follows the direction of
technology acceptance literature by specifying a model that
directly capture several constructs of the UTAUT: behavioral
intention (intention to use LBS), performance expectancy
(instrumental value of using LBS), effort expectancy (learning
cost of using LBS), and individual level factor (personal
innovativeness). Our model also indirectly captures the
component of facilitating conditions. Venkatesh et al. [55]
defined facilitating conditions as the degree to which an
individual believes that an organizational and technical
infrastructure exists to support use of the system. This construct
captures the aspects of technological and/or organizational
environment that is designed to remove barriers to use. In case of
LBS, the technology that may facilitate its use is being promoted
by many service providers. However, privacy concerns are
broadly regarded as the major inhibiting factors in the adoption of
LBS [11]. While easing an individual with many location-based
services, they also raise issues of privacy particularly of releasing
one’s personal information to others. Therefore, in this study we
use the construct of privacy concerns as a specific aspect of
facilitating conditions as proposed in UTAUT. Accordingly, we
define privacy concerns as the degree to which a user’s subjective
views of service providers’ information practices to prevent
misuse of personal information.

2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
2.1. Balancing User Privacy Concerns: A
Calculus Perspective
Information privacy has been defined as the ability of the
individual to control the terms under which personal information
is acquired and used [59]. Prior research has repeatedly shown
that information privacy continues to be eroded as a result of
technology innovations [49]. Not surprisingly then, there is a
robust body of research related to privacy concerns that attempts
to understand how individuals make decisions regarding the
revelation of personal information. In this literature, a key
finding is that the concept of privacy is not absolute but, rather,
can be interpreted in “economic (cost/benefit) terms” [32]. That
is, individuals can be expected to behave as if they are performing
a privacy calculus (cost-benefit analysis) in assessing the
outcomes they will receive as a result of providing personal
information to corporations [28, 40].
A theoretical perspective, consistent with the core idea of privacy
calculus that may help predict individuals’ propensities to
disclose personal information is the rational choice theory [57].
These theories suggest that human action is fundamentally
“rational” in character and that individuals will calculate the
likely costs and benefits of any action and choose the course of
action that maximizes overall rewards. Applying the rational
choice perspective to the LBS context, we may interpret the
information disclosure in LBS as a non-monetary exchange where
consumers disclose their location information in return for value
such as locatability and personalization provided by LBS
providers. Specifically, consumers behave as if they are
performing a risk-benefit analysis (i.e., privacy calculus) in
assessing the outcomes they would receive as the result of
providing personal information to LBS providers. Our study
attempts to develop and test a research model with contrary

Although much theoretical development along the line of
UTAUT has occurred in regard to individual behavior with new
information technologies, this body of work has paid limited
attention to privacy issues. Indeed, a plurality of the theoretical
models have chosen to focus on a central belief associated with
the use of the target technology from a positive-utility oriented
perspective, while paying limited attention to potential negative
consequences arising from the adoption and use of new
technologies (i.e., the risks that individuals may experience with
respect to privacy violations in the L-Commerce context). As a
consequence, we attempt to develop an adoption model to
simultaneously consider both positive and negative outcomes of

2

adopting and using a new technology that raises a new set of
concerns related to individual privacy.

LBS will amplify the desire to engage in the target behavior.
Such a causal mechanism is consistent with UTAUT that includes
performance expectations as the important antecedent to use
intentions [55]. Therefore, we hypothesize:
H1: Performance expectancy is positively related to
intention to use LBS.

3. RESEARCH HYPOTHESES
Based on the notion of privacy calculus and UTAUT, we present
the research model used in this study as shown in Figure 1. The
core of the model is captured by a set of elements in a calculus in
which users make a delicate balance between 1) negative utility
factors such as privacy concerns, and 2) positive utility factors
such as performance expectancy and effort expectancy. We
further propose that personal innovativeness positively relates to
behavioral intention.

Effort expectancy has been defined as the degree or ease
associated with the use of the system [55]. The construct captures
the essence of perceived ease of use in technology acceptance
model, complexity in the model of PC utilization, and ease of use
in the innovation diffusion theory. Adapting from Venkatesh et
al. [55], we define effort expectancy in this research as the degree
or ease associated with the use of LBS. In the context of LBS,
effort expectancy is about an individual’s expectation of using
LBS without much effort. If the process of LBS subscription
involves tedious documentation, registration, learning about
privacy policy, and service terms and conditions, then the mere
effort may inhibit an individual to subscribe for such services.
Apart from subscription, an individual may need to put effort to
learn how to use LBS in the usage process. The more the learning
effort required, the more inhibition would be there on the part of
the individual to use LBS. In other words, the easier it is to use
LBS to obtain desired services, the more an individual would
intend to use LBS. This relationship is generally supported by
UTAUT, according to which effort expectations influence
individual behavioral intention about usage of technology. Hence,
we hypothesize that:
H2: Effort expectancy is positively related to intention to use
LBS.

Figure 1. Research Model

3.1.
Performance
Expectancy,
Expectancy, and Behavioral Intention

Effort

Venkatesh et al. [55] defined performance expectancy as the
degree to which an individual believes that using the system will
help him or her in attaining gains in job performance. This
construct is similar to perceived usefulness, extrinsic motivation,
relative advantage, and outcome expectations that have been
discussed in technology acceptance model, job-fit motivational
model, model of PC utilization, innovation diffusion theory, and
social cognitive theory, respectively. We defined performance
expectancy in our research context as the degree to which an
individual believes that using LBS would reduce his or her time
and effort required to search or access the needed information or
service.

Technology acceptance model [15] proposes the relationship
between perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness. Given
that the construct of effort expectancy is similar to ease of use and
that performance expectancy is similar to perceived usefulness
[55], effort expectancy should be positively related to
performance expectancy. However, such relationship has not
been modeled in UTAUT. Effort expectancy has been found to be
significant only during the first time period and becomes nonsignificant over periods of sustained and extended usage [2, 3, 15,
52, 53]. Since LBS are still considered as new technologies at the
initial diffusion stage, we attempt to predict LBS adoption among
potential users who do not yet have credible information about or
affective bonds with the LBS. Thus we include the relationship
between effort expectancy and performance expectancy in this
study to test if there is any indirect influence on behavioral
intention through performance expectancy. Hence, we
hypothesize:
H3: Effort expectancy is positively related to performance
expectancy.

Performance expectancy captures the notion of the ability of LBS
to provide the intended services accurately. Junglas and Watson
[30] identify five key characteristics of mobile commerce over
and above electronic commerce. These five categories are:
portability (physical aspects of mobile devices that enable them to
be readily carried for long periods of time), reachability (a person
can be in touch with and reached by other people 24 hours per
day, 7 days per week, assuming that the mobile network coverage
is sufficient and the mobile device is switched on), accessibility
(describes the case where a person can access the mobile network
at any time from any location, again assuming adequate mobile
network coverage), localization (describes the ability to locate the
position of a mobile person or entity) and identification (ability of
the mobile device to uniquely identify the user). Out of these five
features, we believe that reachability, localization and
identification are unique aspects fulfilled by LBS. These are the
benefits based on which users develop expectations about
performance of LBS. To the extent that the anticipation of
benefits provides direction for actual behavior through energizing
and motivating individuals and enhancing the perceived value of
various outcomes, a higher expectation about performance of

3.2. The Role of Personal Innovativeness
Although not specifically included in UTAUT, we attempt to
explore the role of personal innovativeness in the research model.
This is because LBS are in early adoption stage whereby many
early innovative adopters simply adopt or try out technologies
without a detailed value-based analysis. Personal innovativeness
has been examined in innovation diffusion research [46], and in
the domain of marketing [e.g., 22, 39]. In the field of information
systems, Agrawal and Prasad [3] define personal innovativeness
as willingness of an individual to try out new technology.

3

Personal innovativeness has been conceptualized in terms of its
operational definition, i.e., individuals are characterized as
‘innovative’ if they are early to adopt an innovation [3]. This
conceptualization was criticized later as using time of adoption as
a surrogate for measuring personal innovativeness obscures its
definition [22, 39], as this conceptualization implies that the
adoption has already been made. Later, marketing researchers felt
it important to conceptually and operationally draw a distinction
between global innovativeness and domain specific
innovativeness [3, 22]. However, empirical studies [27, 33] found
that global innovativeness exhibits low predictive power when
applied to any specific innovation adoption decision. Domainspecific innovativeness, on the other hand, was found to exhibit
significant influence on behaviors within a narrow domain of
activity [27]. Agarwal and Prasad [3] used the domain-specific
innovativeness in the domain of IT for characterizing adoption.
Consistent with their research, we use domain-specific
conceptualization of innovativeness in the context of LBS.
Adapting Agrawal and Prasad’s [3] definition, we define personal
innovativeness as an individual’s willingness to try out LBS. As
personal innovativeness in an individual-specific trait, those who
are more innovative are likely to adopt LBS more readily than
others and vice-versa. Rogers [46] noted that innovators exhibit
certain characteristics behaviors such as active information
seeking, greater exposure to mass-media, and less reliance on
subjective evaluation of other members in their social circle about
the innovation. This implies that innovators’ decision to adopt is
independent of other antecedents of intention to use LBS. Hence,
we hypothesize:
H4: Personal innovativeness is positively related to intention
to use LBS.

of privacy concerns as an antecedent to various behavior-related
variables, e.g., willingness to disclose personal information [9],
intention to transact [17], and information disclosure behavior [7].
Privacy concerns are generally considered as a cost of adopting
new technology [17]. The negative impact of privacy concerns on
behavioral intention has been empirically supported in the ecommerce context [9, 16, 38]. Similarly, we expect a negative
relationship between privacy concerns and behavioral intention in
the context of LBS. Hence, we hypothesize:
H5: Privacy concerns are negatively related to intention to
use LBS.
As discussed earlier, individuals are concerned about loss of
privacy in using LBS whereby their whereabouts and other
personal identifiable information may be tracked by service
providers. Moreover, this information can be used for nefarious
purposes thus encroaching into a person’s personal life.
Especially, in this day and time of widespread terrorism using
mobile devices, individuals are more fearful about disclosing
personal information. The fear of losing control over personal
information reduces their expectancy about the performance of
the technology. In other words, in the wake of privacy invasion,
the technology becomes unattractive. Therefore, LBS that are
perceived as being privacy intrusive may also be perceived as
being plagued with performance problems and usage
uncertainties. Conversely, individuals who perceive service
providers responsible and reliable in terms of using personal
information may increasingly believe they will perform well,
evaluate them highly and potentially adopt them. Hence, we
hypothesize:
H6: Privacy concerns are negatively related to performance
expectancy.

3.3. The Role of Privacy Concerns
Prior privacy research has focused on understanding what
motivates or inhibits the disclosure of personal information.
Among these investigations, the construct of privacy concerns is
one of the most widely used in MIS research and it is often used
as a proxy for the concept of privacy. Several studies have
conceptualized and operationalized privacy concerns in more
detail: the Concern for Information Privacy (CFIP) instrument
was developed by Smith et al. [48] which identified four
dimensions of information privacy concerns: 1) collection
reflected the concern that extensive amounts of personally
identifiable data are being collected and stored in databases; 2)
unauthorized secondary use reflected the concern that
information is collected from individuals for one purpose but is
used for another secondary purposes without consent; 3) errors
reflected the concern that protections against deliberate and
accidental errors in personal data are inadequate; and 4) improper
access reflected the concern that data about individuals are
readily available to people not properly authorized view or work
with data. These dimensions have since served as some of the
most reliable scales for measuring individuals’ concerns toward
organizational privacy practices. Recently, Malhotra et al. [38]
operationalized a multidimensional notion of Internet Users
Information Privacy Concerns (IUIPC) which adapted the CFIP
into the Internet context.

4. METHOD
4.1. Pull-Based vs. Push-Based LBS

According to UTAUT, facilitating conditions influence the usage
of technology. Privacy concerns, as a specific aspect of
facilitating conditions, reflect a user’s subjective views of service
providers’ information practices to prevent misuse of personal
information. Numerous extant studies have treated the construct

1

We conducted a scenario-based survey to test the proposed
model. At present, most of the available LBS are delivered to
mobile users over different underlying technology platforms such
as Wireless Application Protocol-based (WAP-based) mobile
Internet and Short Messaging Service (SMS) [58]. Since most
mobile phones support the SMS1 functionality, LBS in our study
was introduced as the service offered to mobile phone users via
SMS based on the Cell-Identification (Cell-ID)2 technique
employed by the network of telecom operators. Acknowledging
that LBS differentiated by different information delivery
mechanisms could yield distinct benefits and privacy costs for
individuals (Gidari 2000; Levijoki 2001; Wallace et al. 2002), we
test our model using two types of LBS that represent different
information delivery mechanisms. The information delivery and
acquisition in the LBS context could be either pull or push [6, 29,
35, 54]. In pull-based LBS, users request some information or use
some service based on their location on a one-time basis [6, 54].
This type of LBS may be seen in some ‘on demand’ services
where the individual dials or signals a service provider for
specific information/service such as the nearest auto-teller
machine (ATM) or Starbucks store. In these services, location
SMS allows the sending of text messages of up to 160 characters via a mobile
phone.
2
Cell-ID, or Cell of Origin (COO), works by identifying the cell of the network in
which the handset is operating (Barnes 2003). Such technique is the main
technology that is widely deployed in mobile communication networks today. It
requires no modification to handsets or networks since it uses the mobile network
base station as the location of the caller (Barnes 2003).

4

information is ephemeral and useful only for users to receive realtime navigational requests (e.g., informing the user of the nearest
ATM or Starbucks store). The other type of information delivery
mechanism is push-based LBS where the service provider sends
the user relevant information/service based on her known
proximity to a store or service center via a wireless device [6, 54].
In the push-based approach, location information is used to target
the user and she is sent the related advertisements when she gets
within the vicinity of the merchants.

complete the pull-based scenario followed by the push-based
scenario and vice versa. A dummy variable created for order
effects had no significant influence on any of the endogenous
variables in a MANOVA analysis (F (4,171) = 0.912, p = ns).
A total of 176 undergraduate students at a large university were
recruited via an online registration system participated in the
survey (83 females, 93 males). As an incentive for their
participation, each subject received $5 upon completion of the
task. All the subjects owned mobile phones and were familiar
with text messages. While the use of undergraduate students as
potential LBS users might limit the generalizability of the results,
we believe that this should not be a major concern because
research indicates that younger individuals are among the most
avid users of mobile technologies [44], and arguably, represent
the next generation of mobile individuals.

One specific pull-based LBS application and one push-based LBS
application, i.e., the pull-based *SEND-A-TAXI service and
push-based Mobile Coupon (M-Coupon) service, were utilized as
the scenarios in the survey. In the scenario of *SEND-A-TAXI
service, when the individuals wanted to book a taxi, they could
dial a certain number and their location would be detected
automatically via their mobile phones. A list of taxi stands or
landmarks near to their location will be transmitted to them via a
text message. Individuals can select the pick-up point from the
list and confirm their booking by replying to the text message.
The M-Coupon service would involve recruiting individuals by
service registration and interest subscription: Individuals could
register their mobile phone numbers and subscribe to a list of
merchants that provided M-Coupon services, based on their
interests and preferred period of time for receiving coupons.
Profiling information would then be used to target the
subscribers, and their mobile phones would be sent related
promotional information when they came within the vicinity of
merchants.

5. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
A second-generation causal modeling statistical technique –
Partial least squares (PLS), was used for data analysis in this
research for three reasons. First, PLS is widely accepted as a
method for testing theory in early stages, while LISREL is
usually used for theory confirmation [23]. Similar to the cases in
prior research [e.g., 37], we chose PLS as the statistical technique
because this study is an early attempt at advancing a theoretical
model in a new context of LBS. Second, PLS is well suited for
highly complex predictive models [10]. Prior research that
applied PLS [e.g., 31] has claimed that PLS is best suited for
testing complex relationships by avoiding inadmissible solutions
and factor indeterminacy. This makes PLS suitable for
accommodating the relatively complex relationships among
various constructs in current research. Third, PLS has the ability
to assess the measurement model within the context of the
structural model, which allows a more complete analysis of interrelationships in the model.

4.2. Scale Development
To the extent possible, we adapted constructs from measurement
scales used in prior studies to fit the LBS context. Drawing on
technology adoption literature [55], intention to use LBS was
measured with questions on whether the respondents were likely
to use the particular type of LBS, whether they intended to use it,
and whether they would consider using it. Performance
expectancy was measured with four questions to capture the
instrumental value of using the LBS [55]; effort expectancy was
measured with questions on whether using LBS would be clear,
understandable, and easy to use [55]. Personal innovativeness
was assessed with three questions taken from Agarwal and Prasad
[3]. Privacy concerns were measured by seven-point Likert scale
items that integrated more tightly the CFIP's [48] four dimensions
collection of personal information, unauthorized secondary use of
personal information, errors in personal information, and
improper access to personal information. Language was adapted
to capture perceptions of specific service provider’s privacy
practices. All items in the questionnaire were anchored to
appropriately labeled seven-point Likert scales (see Appendix A).

Since it has been noted that pull-based LBS and push-based LBS
provide different instrumental values and induce different privacy
concerns for individuals [34, 58], we split the dataset into two
subsets according to the type of LBS to assess the different
effects of pull- and push-based LBS on the theoretical constructs.
Thus, the measurement and the structural models were tested
separately for the pull- and push-based LBS subsets.

5.1. Evaluating Measurement Model
We evaluated the measurement model by examining the
convergent validity and discriminant validity of the research
instrument. Convergent validity is the degree to which different
attempts to measure the same construct agree [12]. In PLS, three
tests are used to determine the convergent validity of measured
reflective constructs in a single instrument: reliability of items,
composite reliability of constructs, and average variance extracted
by constructs. Table 1 presents the assessment of the
measurement model. We assessed item reliability by examining
the loading of each item on the construct, and found the reliability
score for all the items exceeded the criterion of 0.707. Thus, the
questions measuring each construct in our experiment had
adequate item reliability. Composite reliabilities of constructs
with multiple indicators exceeded Nunnally’s [42] criterion of
0.7. The average variances extracted for the constructs were all
above 50 percent, and the Cronbach’s alphas were also all higher
than 0.7. These results support the convergent validity of the
measurement model.

4.3. Data Collection
Data for the study were collected through a scenario-based
survey. The subjects were asked to assume the role of a potential
LBS user and to evaluate some services that would be soon
introduced in the local market. They were presented with two
scenarios: a pull-based LBS scenario and a push-based LBS one.
Next, they were asked to complete a questionnaire regarding their
intention to use LBS, performance expectancy, effort expectancy,
personal innovativeness, and privacy concerns in each specific
scenario. Scenarios of two different types of LBS applications –
*SEND-A-TAXI service (pull-based) and M-coupon service
(push-based) were described to subjects. To control for order
effects, half of the subjects in each scenario were asked to

5

Discriminant validity is the degree to which measures of different
constructs are distinct [8]. To test discriminant validity, the
square root of the variance shared between a construct and its
measures should be greater than the correlations between the
construct and any other construct in the model. Tables 2 report
the results of discriminant validity which may be seen by
comparing the diagonal to the non-diagonal elements. All items in
our experiment fulfilled the requirement of discriminant validity.

Our findings indicate that performance expectancy, effort
expectancy, and personal innovativeness were positively related
to behavioral intention, i.e., H1, H2, and H4 were supported.
Effort expectancy was found positively related to performance
expectancy and thus H3 was supported. However, privacy
concerns was negatively related to behavioral intention only for
push-based LBS (H5 was partially supported). Also, privacy
concerns was negatively related to performance expectancy only
for pull-based LBS (H6 was partially supported). Table 3
summarizes the hypothesis testing.

Table 1. Psychometric Properties of Constructs

Figure 2a. Graphical Display of Results (Pull)

Table 2. Correlation between Latent Variables

Figure 2b. Graphical Display of Results (Push)
Note: The diagonal line shows the square root of variance extracted
of each construct

Table 3. Results of Hypotheses Testing

5.2. Testing Structural Model
After establishing the validity of the measures, we tested the
structural paths in the research model using PLS. We conducted
hypothesis tests by examining the sign and significance of the
path coefficients. Additionally, we inspected the weights of the
dimensions of the constructs and the explanatory power of the
structural model. A bootstrapping technique was applied to
estimate the significance of the path coefficients. Since PLS does
not generate any overall goodness of fit indices, predictive
validity is assessed primarily through an examination of the
explanatory power and significance of the hypothesized paths.
The explanatory power of the structural model is assessed based
on the amount of variance explained in the endogenous construct
(i.e., behavioral intention). The structural models for the pull and
push mechanisms explained 41.9% and 47.6%, respectively, of
the variance in behavioral intention. These greatly exceeded 10%,
which was suggested by Falk and Miller [21] as an indication of
substantive explanatory power. Figures 2a and 2b show a
graphical display of the results of hypothesis testing.

*Significant at 5% level of significance; **Significant at 1% level of
significance

6. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The goal of this study was to integrate theories and research from
privacy, and technology acceptance in order to construct a
conceptual model of LBS adoption that includes contrary factors
capturing the delicate balance between privacy concerns, learning
costs, and instrumental values that influence behavioral intentions

6

to adopt LBS. The results reveal that performance expectancy,
effort expectancy and personal innovativeness have significant
influences on intention to use LBS for both pull-based and pushbased services. However, the influence of privacy concerns on
behavioral intention and performance expectancy varies under
different types of LBS. On one hand, privacy concern influences
intention to use LBS only in case of push-based LBS (and not in
case of pull-based LBS). On the other hand, privacy concern has
an impact on influencing performance expectancy only in case of
pull-based LBS (and not in case of push-based LBS).

follow from our findings. For researchers, our study underscores
the importance of explicitly incorporating both positive and
negative consequences inherent in technological developments
such as LBS. Our posited predictors explain between 40 percent
and 50 percent of the variance in the intention to use LBS in the
pull- and push-based models, suggesting that our model is a
useful conceptualization of the phenomenon.
Given that
information privacy continues to be eroded as a result of
technology innovations [49], and that there is sufficient evidence
regarding the role of negative utility in the evaluation and
adoption of LBS, researchers need to pay attention to the
placement of negative utility constructs in their theoretical
models. Other important examples of negative utility constructs
that could enrich models of LBS adoption are those of data
quality, service dependability, service cost and risks.

A plausible explanation for this finding is that individuals’
privacy concerns are affected by the level of control inherent in
the delivery mechanisms of location content (i.e., pull or push).
In pull-based LBS, the individual exercises greater control over
the interaction – the decision to initiate contact with the merchant
is volitional, and location information is provided only to
complete the requested transaction (e.g., inform the individual of
the location of the nearest taxi). In contrast, in push-based LBS,
the location information is tacked to target individuals who will
likely be sent unsolicited information/services when they appear
within the vicinity of the merchants. Accordingly, it appears that
push mechanism is more controversial in terms of individuals’
perceptions of privacy and authentication. The current research
has shown that privacy concern has a direct negative impact on
intention to use LBS in push-based LBS; but it influences
behavioral intention indirectly through performance expectancy
in pull-based LBS.

We viewed the adoption of LBS through a rational lens (a
calculus of contrary factors) because the objective of this study
was to predict its adoption among potential users who do not yet
have credible, meaningful information about, or have affective
bonds with the service providers at the initial adoption / usage
stage. Future research could move beyond the domain of initial
adoption / usage stage to the domain of continuance /
discontinuance of usage whereby individuals already have a long
ongoing relationship with service providers. In this context,
social theoretical perspectives such as integrative social contract
theory [19] and trust theories [24] may be particularly relevant.
Indeed, these theories tend to view the sustenance of an ongoing
relationship (i.e., the continuance and discontinuance of LBS
usage) as dependent on individual parties’ assessment and
forecast of the benefits / costs tradeoff of past, present, and future
interactions.
Hence, whether individuals will continue to
participate in this relational contract depends largely on their
estimation of the probability of the service provider’s departure
from the expected pattern of behavior [18]. Further longitudinal
research could be especially useful in investigating how
individuals could be motivated to adopt and continue with LBS
usage.

6.1. Limitations and Future Research
Although the data generally supported the proposed model, we
need to mention some characteristics of our study that may limit
the ability to generalize from these results. First, the scenarios
used in the study represent a simplification of all pull-based and
push-based LBS, which may limit the generalizability of our
findings. Future work could also be directed to look into the
applicability of our findings to different LBS applications.
Second, actual adoption behavior was not measured, rather, we
assumed, based on a significant body of prior work in information
systems [51], organizational behavior [56] and psychology [47],
that intention is a good predictor of actual behavior. However,
some researchers [e.g., 50] have expressed concerns about the
predictive ability of intention for actual behavior. Therefore,
future research could examine the findings of this study in a
context where adoption can be measured for added validation of
the model. However, to the extent that LBS is still in an early
stage of diffusion, examining adoption intention is appropriate
and could potentially yield more meaningful and fruitful lessons
for privacy advocates, individuals and providers of LBS alike.
Finally, although the subjects in this study may fall in the target
market for LBS, the generalizability of this research to the
general population is likely to be affected. Future research should
be conducted with a more diverse sample.

Consistent with Agarwal and Prasad (1998), we also included the
role of individual trait (personal innovativeness) in predicting
their intention to use LBS. While Agarwal and Prasad (1998)
addressed the moderating role of personal innovativeness in
predicting intention to adopt, we tested its direct role in predicting
intention to adopt. Our findings confirm its importance by
revealing that personal innovativeness has a significant influence
behavioral intention for both pull-based and push-based LBS.
Table 2 also reveals that personal innovativeness do not correlate
highly with any of the other latent variables thus ruling out any
possibility of multicollinearity. In other words, our study
highlights the importance of personal innovativeness for studying
adoption intention particularly for studying technologies that are
in the stage of early adoption.
From a practical perspective, this study has implications for LBS
service providers and privacy advocates. Our findings further
suggest that service providers and privacy advocates need not tar
all types of LBS with the same brush. Although privacy
protection is a fundamental concern which must be addressed,
“one size fits all” regulations on privacy are ill equipped to
accommodate the interests of broader groups of users and the full
gamut of players in the LBS industry.

6.2. Implications
The investigation of individual adoption issues in LBS reported
here represents one of the first attempts at developing and testing
a model in LBS, with considerations of balancing privacy
concerns and capturing individual difference in terms of personal
innovativeness. Through the causal modeling of antecedents
affecting adoption intentions of LBS, our findings provide
preliminary theoretical and empirical insight into the dynamic
structural relationships of these factors under two different
mechanisms of content delivery. Several theoretical implications

In conclusion, this study attempted to integrate theories and
research from privacy, and technology acceptance and

7

constructed a conceptual model of LBS adoption that included
contrary factors capturing the delicate balance between privacy
concerns, learning costs, and instrumental values that influence
behavioral intentions to adopt LBS. We also included the role of
personal innovativeness as the study was on a technology, which
is relatively in the early stages of adoption. Our initial findings
that the influences of privacy concerns depend on the type of LBS
suggest the need for future studies to understand these effects
more fully. Using the groundwork laid in this study, future
research along various possible directions could contribute to
extending our theoretical understanding and practical ability to
foster the acceptance of LBS.

[12]
M. Cook and D.T. Campbell, Quasi-Experimentation:
Design and Analysis Issues for Field Settings, Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1979.
[13] M.J. Culnan, "Consumer Awareness of Name Removal
Procedures: Implication for Direct Marketing," Journal of
Interactive Marketing, vol. 9, 1995, pp. 10-19.
[14] M.J. Culnan and J.R. Bies, "Consumer Privacy: Balancing
Economic and Justice Considerations," Journal of Social Issues,
vol. 59, no. 2, 2003, pp. 323-342.
[15]
F.D. Davis, R.P. Bagozzi, and P.R. Warshaw, "User
acceptance of computer technology: A comparison of two
theoretical models," Management Science, vol. 35, 1989, pp. 9821003.

7. REFERENCES
[1]
ABI, Mobile Location-Based Services: Market
Development, Revenue Opportunities, LBS Applications, and
Key Industry Players in ABI Research. 2008, Allied Business
Intelligence Inc.

[16] T. Dinev and P. Hart, "An Extended Privacy Calculus
Model for E-Commerce Transactions," Information Systems
Research, vol. 17, no. 1, 2006, pp. 61-80.

[2]
R. Agarwal and J. Prasad, "The Role of Innovation
Characteristics and Perceived Voluntariness in the Acceptance of
Information Technologies," Decision Sciences, vol. 28, no. 3,
1997, pp. 557-582.

[17] T. Dinev and P. Hart, "Internet privacy concerns and social
awareness as determinants of intention to transact," International
Journal of Electronic Commerce, vol. 10, no. 2, 2006, pp. 7-29.

[3] R. Agarwal and J. Prasad, "A Conceptual and Operational
Definition of Personal Innovativeness in the Domain of
Information Technology," Information Systems Research, vol. 9,
no. 2, 1998, pp. 204-215.

[18] T. Donaldson and W.T. Dunfee, Ties that Bind: A Social
Contracts Approach to Business Ethics, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press, 1999.
[19]
W.T. Dunfee, N.C. Smith, and T.W.J. Ross, "Social
Contracts and Marketing Ethics," Journal of Marketing, vol. 63,
1999, pp. 14-32.

[4] J.S. Barnes, "Known by the Network: The Emergence of
Location-Based Mobile Commerce," in E-P. Lim and K. Siau,
ed., Advances in Mobile Commerce Technologies, Hershey, PA:
Idea Group Publishing, 2003, pp. 171-189.

[20] J. Easton, "Going Wireless: Transform Your Business with
Mobile Technology," New York: HarperBusiness, 2002, pp. 2433.

[5] E. Beinat, "Privacy and Location-based Services: Stating the
Policies Clearly," GeoInformatics, vol. 4, 2001, pp. 14-17.

[21] R.F. Falk and N.B. Miller, A Primer for Soft Modeling,
Akron, Ohio: University of Akron Press, 1992.

[6] C.G. Bruner II and A. Kumar, Attitude toward LocationBased Advertising. 2007, Journal of Interactive Advertising (7:2):

[22]
L.R. Flynn and R.E. Goldsmith, "A Short, Reliable
Measure of Subjective Knowledge," Journal of Business
Research, vol. 46, no. 1, 1999, pp. 57-66.

[7] T.P. Buchanan, A.; Reips, J.U., "Development of measures
of online privacy concern and protection for use on the Internet,"
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, vol. 58, no. 2, 2007, pp. 157-165.

[23] C. Fornell and F.L. Bookstein, "Two Structrual Equation
Models: LISREL and PLS Applied to Customer Exit-Voice
Theory," Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 19, no. 11, 1982,
pp. 440-452.

[8]
D.T. Campbell and D.W. Fiske, "Convergent and
Discriminant Validation by the Multitrait-Multimethod Matrix,"
Psychological Bulletin, vol. 56, no. 1, 1959, pp. 81-105.

[24] D. Gefen, E. Karahanna, and D.W. Straub, "Trust and TAM
in online shopping: an integrated model," MIS Quarterly, vol. 27,
no. 1, 2003, pp. 51-90.

[9] R.K. Chellappa and R. Sin, "Personalization versus Privacy:
An Empirical Examination of the Online Consumer's Dilemma,"
Information Technology and Management, vol. 6, no. 2, 2005, pp.
181-202.

[25]
M.G. Giaglis, P. Kourouthanassis, and A. Tsamakos,
"Towards a Classification Framework for Mobile Location
Services," in B.E. Mennecke and T.J. Strader, ed., Mobile
Commerce: Technology, Theory, and Applications, Hershey, PA:
Idea Group Publishing, 2002, pp. 64-81.

[10]
W.W. Chin, "The Partial Least Squares Approach to
Structural Equation Modeling," in G.A. Marcoulides, ed., Modern
Methods for Business Research, London: 1998b, pp. 295-336.
[11]
R. Clarke, "Person location and person tracking:
Technologies, risks and policy implications," Information
Technology & People, vol. 14, no. 2, 2001, pp. 206.

[26]
A. Gidari, No 'L-Commerce' Without 'L-Privacy': Fair
Location Information Practices for Mobile Commerce, in paper
presented at L-Commerce 2000-The Location Services & GPS
Technology Summit. 2000, Washington, D.C.

8

[42] J.C. Nunnally, Psychometric Theory, 2nd ed., New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1978.

[27] R.E. Goldsmith and C.F. Hofacker, "Measuring consumer
innovativeness," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
vol. 19, no. 3, 1991, pp. 209-221.

[43] G. Orwell, 1984, San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
Publishers, 1984. Originally published as Nineteen Eighty-Four,
London: Martin Secker & Warburg, 1949.

[28] C. Goodwin, "Privacy: Recognition of a Consumer Right,"
JOURNAL OF PUBLIC POLICY AND MARKETING, vol. 10, no.
1, 1991, pp. 149-166.

[44] E.P. Pedersen, "Adoption of Mobile Internet Services: An
Exploratory Study of Mobile Commerce Early Adopters,"
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce,
vol. 15, no. 2, 2005, pp. 203 - 222.

[29]
H.-A. Jacobsen, "Middleware for Location-Based
Services," in J. H. Schiller and A. Voisard, ed., Location-based
Services, Morgan Kaufmann: Elsevier, 2004, pp. 84-110.

[45] B. Rao and L. Minakakis, "Evolution of Mobile LocationBased Services," Communications of ACM, vol. 46, no. 12, 2003,
pp. 61-65.

[30]
I. Junglas and R.T. Watson, "The U-Constructs: Four
Information Drives," Communications of AIS, vol. 17, 2006, pp.
569-592.

[46] E.M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 4th ed., New York,
NY: Free Press, 1995.

[31] D. Kim and I. Benbasat, "The Effects of Trust-Assuring
Arguments on Consumer Trust in Internet Stores: Application of
Toulmin's Model of Argumentation," Information Systems
Research, vol. 17, no. 3, 2006, pp. 286-300.

[47]
B.H. Sheppard, J. Hartwick, and P.R. Warshaw, "The
Theory of Reasoned Action: A Meta-Analysis of Past Research
with Recommendations for Modifications and Future Research,"
Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 15, no. 3, 1988, pp. 325-343.

[32] P.H. Klopfer and D.I. Rubenstein, "The Concept Privacy
and Its Biological Basis," Journal of Social Issues, vol. 33, no. 3,
1977, pp. 52-65.

[48] H.J. Smith, J.S. Milberg, and J.S. Burke, "Information
Privacy: Measuring Individuals' Concerns About Organizational
Practices," MIS Quarterly, vol. 20, no. 2, 1996, pp. 167-196.

[33]
D. Leonard-Barton and I. Deschamps, "Managerial
influence in the implementation of new technology,"
Management Science, vol. 34, no. 10, 1988, pp. 1252-1265.

[49] E.F. Stone and D.L. Stone, "Privacy in Organizations:
Theoretical Issues, Research Findings, and Protection
Mechanisms," Research in Personnel and Human Resources
Management, vol. 8, no. 3, 1990, pp. 349-411.

[34]
S. Levijoki, Privacy vs Location Awareness. 2001,
Working Paper, Helsinki University of Technology:
[35] S. Levijoki, Privacy vs Location Awareness. 2001, Helsinki
University of Technology:

[50]
D. Straub, M. Limayem, and E. Karahanna-Evaristo,
"Measuring System Usage: Implications for IS Theory Testing,"
Management Science, vol. 41, no. 8, 1995, pp. 1328-1342.

[36]
S. Levy, A Future With Nowhere to Hide? 2004,
Newsweek

[51] S. Taylor and P. Todd, "Assessing IT usage: The role of
prior experience," MIS Quarterly, vol. 19, no. 4, 1995, pp. 561570.

[37]
M. Ma and R. Agarwal, "Through a Glass Darkly:
Information Technology Design, Identity Verification, and
Knowledge Contribution in Online Communities," Information
Systems Research, vol. 18, no. 1, 2007, pp. 42-67.

[52]
R. Thompson, C. Higgins, and J. Howell, "Personal
Computing Toward a Conceptual Model of Utilization,"
Management Information Systems Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 1, 1991,
pp. 124-143.

[38] N.K. Malhotra, S.S. Kim, and J. Agarwal, "Internet Users'
Information Privacy Concerns (IUIPC): The Construct, the Scale,
and a Causal Model," Information Systems Research, vol. 15, no.
4, 2004, pp. 336-355.

[53] R.L. Thompson, C.A. Higgins, and J.M. Howell, "Influence
of experience on personal computer utilization: testing a
conceptual model," Journal of Management Information Systems,
vol. 11, no. 1, 1994, pp. 167-187.

[39] D.F. Midgley and G.R. Dowling, "Innovativeness: The
Concept and Its Measurement," Journal of Consumer Research,
vol. 4, no. 4, 1978, pp. 229-242.

[54] R. Unni and R. Harmon, Perceived Effectiveness of Push
vs. Pull Mobile Location-Based Advertising. 2007, Journal of
Interactive Advertising (7:2):

[40]
G.R. Milne and E.M. Gordon, "Direct Mail PrivacyEfficiency Trade-Offs Within an Implied Social Contract
Framework," Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, vol. 12,
no. 2, 1993, pp. 206-215.

[55] V. Venkatesh, G.M. Morris, B.G. Davis, and F.D. Davis,
"User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward A Unified
View," MIS Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, 2003, pp. 425-478.

[41] P.R. Minch, "Privacy Issues in Location-Aware Mobile
Devices," in Proceedings of Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, Hawaii,
2004, IEEE Computing Society Press, pp. 127-136.

[56]
V. Venkatesh and C. Speier, "Computer Technology
Training in the Workplace: A Longitudinal Investigations of the
Effects of the Mood," Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, vol. 79, no. 1, 1999, pp. 1-28.

9

[57] J. Von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior, 2nd ed., Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1947.
[58]
P. Wallace, A. Hoffmann, D. Scuka, Z. Blut, and K.
Barrow, i-Mode Developer's Guide, Boston, Mass: AddisonWesley, 2002.
[59] A.F. Westin, Privacy and Freedom, New York: Atheneum,
1967.

Appendix A. Measurement Items

(measured on
seven-point, Likert-type scale: 1 – Strongly disagree; 7
– Strongly agree)

Intention to Use LBS (INT)
1.
2.
3.

I intend to use the LBS in the next 6 months
I predict I would use the LBS in the next 6 months
I plan to use the LBS in the next 6 months

Performance Expectancy (PEPT)
1.
2.
3.
4.

LBS reduce my searching time to find the
information/services that I need
LBS reduce my searching efforts to find the
information/services I needed
With the LBS, I can quickly access the information/services
that I need
With the LBS, I can easily access the information/services
that I need

Effort Expectancy (EEPT)
1.
2.
3.

My interaction with the LBS would be clear and
understandable
I would find the LBS easy to use
Learning to use LBS is easy for me

Personal Innovativeness (INNO)
1.
2.
3.

If I heard about a new information technology, I would look
for ways to experiment with it
Among my peers, I am usually the first to try out new
information technologies
I like to experiment with new information technologies

Privacy Concerns (PCON)
1.
2.
3.
4.

Service providers are collecting too much information about
me
Service providers may not take measures to prevent
unauthorized access to my location information
Service providers may keep my location information in a
non-accurate manner in their database
Service providers may share my location information with
other companies without notifying me or getting my
authorization

10

