Barriers to Socio-economic Opportunities in Africa:
An e-Government Perspective
Devendra D. Potnis

Dawit H. Demissie

Doctoral Candidate
College of Computing and Information
State University of New York –
University at Albany
7A Harriman Campus, Suite 220
1400 Washington Ave, Albany
NY - 12222
Tel: 518-956-8248

Doctoral Candidate
College of Computing and Information
State University of New York –
University at Albany
7A Harriman Campus, Suite 220
1400 Washington Ave, Albany
NY - 12222
Tel: 518-956-8248

dp772351@albany.edu

dd536519@albany.edu

Economics, Human Factors, Legal Aspects

surveys measuring “willingness” and “capacity” of more than 178
member states of UN infer e-Government to be a gateway to
socio-economic opportunities which eventually lead to a creation
of a knowledge-based society in respective member states [3,4,6].
Hence, various factors influencing the successful implementation
of e-Government initiatives also affect socio-economic
opportunities experienced by citizens. e-Government being one of
the gateways to socio-economic opportunities for citizens, barriers
to e-Government initiatives essentially act as barriers to potential
socio-economic opportunities. Past studies reveal that impacts of
e-Government implementations are comparatively more visible in
the context of developing nations including Africa, than the rest of
the developed world [9,10]. This research will identify a set of
barriers to socio-economic opportunities in Africa, which in turn
influence the success of e-Government initiatives in Africa. Our
research will also carve out inter-relationships among barriers to
socio-economic opportunities in Africa.

Keywords

2. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

e-Government in Africa, Socio-economic Opportunities

Grounded theory research methodology analyzes secondary data
in the form of scholarly literature on e-Government initiatives in
Africa, published after the year 2001, a milestone year in the eGovernment area. According to UN e-Government Readiness
Assessment Surveys, in 2001, e-Government was a new trend
then and not a regular practice for governments to offer their
services [2]. Hence, secondary data analysis under grounded
theory research methodology focuses on scholarly literature
published after the year 2001, which elaborates on barriers to
socio-economic opportunities in Africa. When compared to other
fields related to governance, the research on e-Government seems
to be in embryonic stage. There are not many theoretical models
which are derived from empirical evidences in the area of eGovernment (Ridley 2008).

ABSTRACT
Various barriers to socio-economic opportunities in Africa are
explored though e-Government as a lens of study. Using grounded
theory methodology, scholarly literature on e-Government in
Africa has been analyzed to model various barriers. The research
is expected to serve as a scholarly reference for decision-makers
in the private and the public sector organizations, as well as
policymakers, for making decisions about design, development
and execution of e-Government initiatives in Africa.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4.1-3 [Computing Milieux]: COMPUTERS AND SOCIETY
public policy, social issues, organizational impacts

General Terms

1. INTRODUCTION
Since the year 2001, e-Government has emerged as a
programmatic tool for executing government operations with a
key focus on offering government services to citizens [1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7]. e-Government initiatives which encourage citizens’
participation in government activities act as participatory tools
through which citizens can contribute actively in government
thereby bolstering the core notion of democracy.
UN defines e-Government as “…use of ICTs and its application
by the government for provision of information and public
services to the people [8].” United Nations has championed
deployment of information and communication technologies
(ICTs), an indispensible construct for building e-Government
initiatives [2]. Various UN e-Government readiness assessment

In the context of e-Government initiatives undertaken by U.N.
member states in Africa, this research paper identifies a number of
barriers to providing socio-economic opportunities to citizens via
e-Government initiatives. In the first round of grounded theory
research methodology, codes are identified from a vast body of
literature on e-Government initiatives deployed by various
member states in Africa (See Table 1). In the second round of
axial coding, codes identified in the first round are labeled
according to their coherence and proximity in terms of their
meanings. In the third round, axial coding in the form of various

labels are grouped and key categories for barriers to socioeconomic opportunities in Africa are surfaced.
Table 1. Grounded Theory Research Methodology: A Process
of Deriving Categories of Barriers to Socio-economic
Opportunities in Africa

1

First Round

Second Round

Third Round

of Coding

of Axial Coding

Surfacing
Possible
Categories of
Barriers to Socioeconomic
Opportunities in
Africa

Software, hardware,
technological
infrastructure,
sophisticated IT
mobile
telephony

cellular

Who owns
information?
Trained
workforce,
human capital
2

what

Human Factor in
IT Deployment

Local and foreign
investment, network
economy, cost of
accessing internet

Financial Status

Supply
Demand,
Commerce,
Business

4

Myriad of
attributes related
to Information
and
Communication
Technologies
(ICTs)

Information
Management
Issues

IT
IT

Knowledge
economy,
information
economy,

3

Technology
Related

Economic Status
of Member States

Economic
Impacts

and
ee-

e-Government

just 4% of ICTs
users in the Arab
world )
Food,
drinking
water, shelter

Basic Needs of
Citizens

Source: All the findings in the above table are resulted from the
secondary data analysis of literature covered in references 12 –
23.
So far, our secondary data analysis has identified four possible
broad categories of barriers to socio-economic opportunities in
Africa, which are as follows: political context of member states,
social environment in nations running e-Government activities,
myriad of attributes related to information and communication
technologies (ICTs), and economic status of member states.

3. FUTURE RESEARCH AND
APPLICATIONS
As mentioned earlier, the research also aims to capture interrelationships among various codes identified in the first round of
coding. The set of inter-relationships will be incorporated with the
above mentioned key categories which are surfaced in the third
round. As a result of this research, a new model including key
categories of barriers to socio-economic opportunities in Africa
along with inter-relationships among them will be proposed. The
resultant model is expected to inform polices and strategies for
strengthening e-Government movement, a gateway to offer better
socio-economic opportunities in Africa. This model of barriers to
socio-economic opportunities in Africa could serve as a rich and
quick reference for decision-makers in private and public sector
organizations as well as policymakers while making decisions
about design, development and execution of e-Government
initiatives in Africa.

Market Force

4. REFERENCES

Lack of peace,
unstable
government,
government
structure

Political
Phenomena

Developed
legal
system to facilitate
effective regulatory
policies

Legal System

Lack of establishing
and
setting
up
appropriate policies
to identify research
areas

Policy

Education level of
citizens,
gender
inequalities
(eg.
Women account for

Social Issues

Political context

[1] United Nations Division for Public Economics and Public
Administration & American Society for Public Administration
(2001). Benchmarking E-government: A Global Perspective:
Assessing the Progress of the UN Member States.

[2] UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA)
and the Civic Resource Group (CRG) (2003). UN Global Egovernment Survey. Retrieved June 19, 2008, from
unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/UN/UNPAN028
607.pdf
[3] United Nation Department of Economic and Social Affairs
Division for Public Administration and Development
Management (2004).Global e-Government Readiness Report
2004: Towards Access for Opportunity.

Social
Environment in
Nations deploying

[4] United Nation Department of Economic and Social Affairs
Division for Public Administration and Development
Management (2005).Global e-Government Readiness Report
2005: From E-Government to E-Inclusion.
[5] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
Division for Public Administration and Development

Management (2006). E-Participation and E-Government:
Understanding the Present and Creating the Future.
[6] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
Division for Public Administration and Development
Management (2008).UN e-Government Survey 2008: From eGovernment to Connected Governance.
[7] Potnis, D. & Pardo, T.(2008). A work in progress: The United
Nations eGRI, 2008 Digital Government Conference, Montreal,
Canada.
[8] Curtin, G.(2007). Encyclopedia of Political Communications.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
[9] Heeks, R. (2006). Understanding and measuring
eGovernment: International benchmarking studies. Paper prepared
for UNDESA workshop, E-Participation and E-Government:
Understanding the Present and Creating the Future (Budapest,
Hungary, 27-28 July 2006). Retrieved September 1-10, 2008,
from
http://www.ansaafrica.net/uploads/documents/publications/eGovernment_benchm
arking_2006.pdf.
[10] Heeks, R. (2002). iGovernment Working Paper Series:
eGovernment in Africa: Promise and Practice Institute for
Development Policy and Management.
[11] Ridley, G. (2008). e_Government: making sense of
fragmentation and contradiction. E-gov pre-ECIS Workshop,
Galway Ireland. (Unpublished).
[12] Molla, A., (2000). Downloading or Uploading? The
information economy and Africa's current status”, Information
Technology for Development. 9, 205-221
[13] Frohmann, B.,(2007). Assembling an African Information
Ethics. International Review of Information Ethics.7, 1-11
[14] International Food and Policy Research Institute (2000).
Bridging the Digital Divide. (unpublished)

[15] Stambach, A.,
& Malekela, G.(2006). Education,
technology, and the 'new' knowledge economy: views from
Bongoland. Globalization, Societies and Education. 4(3), 321-336
[16] Weber, S., & Bussell, J.(2005).Will Information Technology
Reshape the North-South Asymmetry of Power in the Global
Political Economy? Studies in Comparative International
Development, 40(2),62-84.
[17] Britz,J., Lor,p., Coetzee, I., & Bester, B.(2005). Africa as a
knowledge society: A reality check. The International Information
& Library Review, 38(1), 25-40
[18] Heeks, R. (2002). Information Systems and Developing
Countries: Failure, Success, and Local Improvisations, The
Information Society, v. 18.
[19] Huyer, S. (2002).ICTs, Globalization and Poverty Reduction:
Gender Dimensions of the Knowledge Society, IDRC
Publications.
[20] Chikonzo, A.(2006). The potential of information and
communication technologies in collecting, preserving and
disseminating indigenous knowledge in Africa. The International
Information & Library Review, 38, 132–138
[21] Lor, J., & Britz, J.(2007).Is a knowledge society possible
without freedom of access to information? Journal of Information
Science, 33, 387
[22] Kabamba, J.(2008). Globalization a disservice to human
development in Africa: the impact of ICT, Central University of
Technology, Free State, South Africa, unpublished.
[23] Voutier, R.(2005). Leading Africa into the knowledge society
Speech to Knowledge Management Africa 2005, Johannesburg,
South Africa., unpublished.

