Building Ontologies for Information Systems:
What we have, what we need
Andrey Soares

Frederico Fonseca

Pennsylvania State University
University Park, 16802
+1(814)865-6177

Pennsylvania State University
University Park, 16802
+1(814)865-6460

asoares@ist.psu.edu

fredfonseca@ist.psu.edu

ABSTRACT

driving all of its aspects and components.

In this research, we investigate how we can build ontologies that
are suitable to Information Systems design. We analyzed
methodologies for building ontologies from scratch. Preliminary
results show that the process of building ontologies for
Information Systems should address issues of metamodels,
procedural knowledge, temporal relations and knowledge
acquisition.

Building ontologies for Information Systems is not an easy task,
and requires a great set of skills from the Ontology Engineer.
There has been a proliferation of conceptual modeling methods
that use ontology as an artifact in Information Systems Analysis
and Design (ISAD). Despite almost three decades of research and
a shared understanding that ontology plays a central role in
Information Systems [2, 4, 5, 6], researchers have not yet
produced a standard set of methodological guidelines for building
ontologies to be used in ISAD.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.4 [Knowledge Representation Formalism and Methods]:
Representations, Semantic Networks. I.2.6 [Learning]: Concept
Learning, Knowledge Acquisition.

A survey [7] shows that 60% of the participants did not use any
methodology to build their ontologies (Figure 1).

General Terms
Management, Documentation, Design, Theory

Keywords
Building Ontology, Information Systems Design, Methodologies

1. INTRODUCTION
The first step in the conceptual modeling activities of
Information Systems (IS) is the transformation of the perceived
real-world into a model of the world it intends to represent. As
ontology is used to represent the real-world, “our descriptions [of
the world] will only be as good as our ontologies” [1, p.xii], and
because information systems are models of real-world systems,
“our information systems will only be as good as our ontologies”
[1, p.xii].
We are interested in ontologies in the context of Ontology-Driven
Information Systems (ODIS), where they can be used at
development time and at run time [2, 3]. At development time,
an ontology can be used in the conceptual modeling phase of IS,
representing the knowledge of a given domain and supporting the
creation of IS components, such as information resources,
applications programs, and user interfaces. At run time, an
ontology can be used as another part of the information system
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
iConference’09, February 8–11, 2009, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0004…$5.00.

Figure 1: Methodologies used to develop ontologies [7].
The goal of this research is to identify guidelines for the process
of building ontologies that are suitable to IS design. We studied
existing methodologies and we identified four main issues that
need to be considered when designing ontologies to be used in
ISAD.

2. RESEARCH
For our sampling, we selected methodologies that fall into the
category of building ontologies from scratch [8]. In this category,
we envision ontologies that are built from ground up by designers
who are acquiring knowledge about a domain through
interactions with stakeholders and observations of their daily
activities.
Our initial investigation revealed important issues that should be
taken into consideration in the process of building ontologies for
ISAD. These issues are related to:


Metamodels: guide the construction of domain
ontologies and increases the semantic for
understanding the domain.





Procedural knowledge: describes a set of tasks for
achieving goals.
Temporal relations: represent the chronological
arrangement of the tasks
Knowledge acquisition: relates to a systematic
approach for capturing domain knowledge

A thorough analysis of existing methodologies for building
ontologies should uncover important lessons learned and
practical approaches that can support the process of building
ontologies for the purpose of modeling and designing Information
Systems. It should also provide a list of issues that still need to
be addressed to allow that to happen.
We used the issues above and some other criteria that we
developed to frame the analysis of the methodologies, as follows:















Knowledge Acquisition: we are looking for techniques
that can help acquiring knowledge about a domain.
Identify Concepts: we want to know how the
methodologies support the identification of domain
concepts, including their related attributes and
relationships.
Identify Tasks: this criterion covers how the
methodologies identify and represent the procedural
knowledge needed to achieve goals.
Identify Temporal Relations: we are looking for
particular ways to identify and to represent the
chronology and dependences of the tasks within the
ontology.
Identify Axioms: an important feature of ontology is the
possibility of representing relevant constraints of the
domain. This criterion gives us valuable information on
how the methodologies propose the identification and
description of theses constraints as well as what logic
approaches are used to describe the constraints (e.g.,
descriptive logic).
Ontology Levels: developing ontologies with the help
of a metamodel ontology can provide additional
knowledge about the domain. This criterion focuses on
the methodologies that are using different levels of
ontology.
Identify Constructs: if a methodology has adopted
different levels of ontologies, we want to know if they
propose guidelines for identifying the constructs of the
higher-level ontologies as well as if they suggest a
method for mapping the levels.
Domain Specific: we want to know if the methodology
was developed to accommodate a specific domain or if
it is flexible to be applied to other domains, especially
the Information Systems domain.

Motivated by Guarino’s caveat about the lack of principled
methodologies to build ontologies [9], we are also paying careful
attention to the issues identified by each methodology as well as
the approaches used to overcome the issues. In particular, we
want to track the influences behind the methodologies by
identifying (1) if a methodology has included parts from other
methodologies within its own approach, (2) which methodologies
have been analyzed to identify open issues, and (3) what specific
theories have been adopted to support the methodology.

3. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work reports the preliminary results of our analysis of
methodologies for building ontologies. Suggesting guidelines for
building ontologies either by reusing existing approaches or by
proposing new ones constitutes a significant contribution to IS
researchers and practitioners.
As the use of ontology for representing knowledge increases and
crosses different domains, we see the need for simplified
approaches for people to build ontologies about their domains. In
this case, we envision methodologies that will allow end-users
(i.e., non-ontologists) to build their own ontologies without the
burden of learning the underpinnings of ontology engineering,
and in a way that is similar to how they think and communicate.
Also, people should be able to quickly identify important
conceptual and procedural knowledge from the domain, and map
them to the proper constructs of computational ontologies.

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Steve Sawyer, Dr. Mary Beth Rosson, and Dr.
Timothy Simpson for their valuable criticism and comments on
the development of this research.

5. REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

Wand, Y. and Weber, R. 2004. Reflection: Ontology in
Information Systems - Foreword. Journal of Database
Management, 15, 2, (Apr/Jun), iii-vi.
Guarino, N. 1998. Formal Ontology in Information
Systems. In Proceedings of the FOIS'98, Trento, Italy,
Amsterdam, IOS Press.
Uschold, M. 2008. Ontology-Driven Information Systems:
Past, Present and Future. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Formal Ontology in
Information Systems (FOIS2008), Saarbrücken, Germany,
(Oct 31st - Nov 3rd).
Bubenko, J. A. 1979. On the Role of 'Understanding
Models' in conceptual schema design. In Proceedings of the
Fifth International Conference on Very Large Data Bases,
Rio De Janeiro, Brazil, IEEE.
Fonseca, F. 2007. The Double Role of Ontologies in
Information Science Research. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 58, 6,
786-793.
Wand, Y. and Weber, R. 1989. An Ontological Evaluation
of Systems Analysis and Design Methods. In Proceedings
of the Information Systems Concepts: An in-Depth
Analysis, Elsevier Science Publisher.
Cardoso, J. 2007. The Semantic Web Vision: Where are
We? IEEE Intelligent Systems, (September/October), 2226.
Pinto, H. S. and Martins, J. P. 2004. Ontologies: How can
They be Built? Knowledge and Information Systems, 6, 4,
441-464.
Guarino, N. and Welty, C. 2000. A Formal Ontology of
Properties. In Proceedings of the EKAW'2000, SpringerVerlag Berlin Heidelberg.

