Communities Connect Network: Advancing e-Inclusion in
Washington State through Community Technology
Michael Crandall

Karen E. Fisher

Carol Landry

University of Washington
Box 352840
Seattle, WA 98195-2840
206-897-1798

University of Washington
Box 352840
Seattle, WA 98195-2840
206-543-6238

University of Washington
Box 352840
Seattle, WA 98195-2840
206-543-0242

mikecran@u.washington.edu

fisher@u.washington.edu

cflandry@u.washington.edu

ABSTRACT
Community Technology Centers (CTCs) are community-based
organizations providing public access to computer-based
training, content, and services (including the Internet) for a
target population, usually underserved. We describe our study of
a two-year effort by a consortium of organizations in
Washington State to document, describe, and communicate the
impact of CTCs on the lives of the individuals, families, and
communities engaged in using their services.
The findings and results directly address the conference theme
of e-inclusion in the iSociety: addressing under represented
groups among iDesigners as well as iConsumers (e.g., women,
children and youth, the aging, people with disabilities, racial and
ethnic minorities, immigrant communities, non-Western
cultures). The study represents a concrete example of “digital
inclusion” and provides a strong model for other efforts of this
nature in the future.
As discussed by Crandall and Fisher [1] and in the seminal
“Falling through the Net: Toward digital inclusion” NTIA report
[5], digital inclusion goes beyond access to include technology
literacy and relevant content and services as the cornerstones of
full engagement in the iSociety. The Communities Connect
Network adopted this framework in their work to develop a
statewide network of CTCs over the past two years, through
targeted training activities for CT providers, development of an
online community network for the providers, and advocacy
efforts in which the providers were engaged to present a
common voice to the state legislature.
As a member of CCN, the aim of our research was to gauge how
people of Washington State were (a) using and (b) benefitting
from CT services. Two primary methods were used to collect
data: 1) a telephone survey with staff from the 211 CTCs in the
state (identified through combining existing directories and lists
available at the time of the study), and 2) case studies of 7
organizations to explore user and staff perceptions of the
benefits obtained from using the CTCs. Dervin’s Sense-Making
approach [c.f., 7], Durrance and Fisher’s outcomes-based toolkit
[2], and Fisher, Marcoux, Miller, Sanchez and Cunningham’s
work [3] informed the study, specifically the structuring of the
data collection and early analytic tools.
Regarding the survey, 47 of the 211 responding agencies
provided self-reported data, including: the frequency and
volume of service use, the demographics, and barriers and
enablers to delivery of services. Key characteristics of the CTCs

were also documented in this survey to provide a broad picture
of the nature of services offered, staffing characteristics, and
longevity.
For the CTCs responding to the survey, three quarters of the
programs had been in existence for more than 5 years, indicating
both the community need and the success that most of the
programs had in meeting that need for an extended period of
time. Slightly less than two thirds of the centers (64%) had less
than 5 staff members, with another 19% having between 5 and
10 people on staff. The small size of most of these centers
reflects the budgetary constraints and localized nature of their
services. Almost all of the centers are non-profits, and selfidentify as neighborhood community or service centers of some
type.
Using the combined results from the survey and previous data
collected from grantees in the Bill & Melinda Gates
foundation’s Community Access to Technology program, equal
to about half of the known community technology providers in
the state (total of 103 CTCs), we found that these agencies serve
a minimum of 99,467 unique users per year. Weekly counts
show that on average, a user visits 14 times during the year,
resulting in an estimated total of 1,392,538 visits per year.
These descriptive statistics were combined with findings from
the in-depth field studies, conducted through on-site interviews
and focus groups with CTC staff and users (ages 14 and older),
and field observation. The transcripts and field notes were
analyzed to discover the emergent themes among staff and users
of the centers, using standard qualitative methods [e.g., 4], and
used in conjunction with the descriptive statistics to present an
in-depth picture of the impacts of CTCs in the state.
Analysis of the case study interviews revealed that users had
varied reasons for using the CTCs. Learning new social and
technical skills, preparing for jobs, connecting with others, and
education were some of the more important reasons voiced by
both staff and users. Significant outcomes identified clustered in
6 areas: employment/economic, academic skills and literacy,
social inclusion and personal growth, independence, access to
information and resources, and communication.
When asked how users benefited by their associations with the
CTCs, approximately 12% of 235 responses alluded to the
Academic skills and literacy outcome such as providing
references and/or resumes for college or jobs, academic
improvement like raising math scores one letter grade, and

preparing users to obtain a GED or go to college. With regard to
fiscal concerns, 23% pointed to the Employment/Economic
outcome where users developed job skills that prepared them for
getting a job, empowered them to obtain additional technical
skills and helped them to gain employment. By far, however,
the greatest individual impact was noted for the Social inclusion
and personal growth outcome (36%). An assortment of
characteristics such as relationship building and friendship,
staying out of trouble, developing or expanding interests,
tangible skill development (e.g. leadership, public speaking) and
providing connections to community leaders were identified as
benefits for users in this area. The building confidence and
elevating expectations attribute was most mentioned by users.
The most common response for family benefits applied to the
Academic Skills and literacy outcome (40%), and of these, 85%
referred to the Connecting families to technology attribute.
Under the Social inclusion and personal outcome, 22% of
answers applied to improving family relationships and keeping
kids safe by checking their online activities. CTCs also
benefited families by keeping them connected, shown by the
18% of responses attributed to the Communication outcome.
Many users are immigrants and CTCs allow them to stay in
touch with family members, for example, in Mexico where there
are many cybercafés. In terms of the Employment/economic
outcome, 12% of answers credited CTCs for helping users to get
a better paying job, and higher income employment benefited
families by making it easier to meet daily living expenses.
Of the 76 responses pertaining to community impact,
participants indicated that the Employment/Economic outcome
was the most significant to users’ communities, as 42% were
ascribed to a more skilled work force and to a better educated
population. CTC impact was soundly represented in the Social
inclusion and personal growth outcome. Just over 42% of
responses revealed that the community benefited from CTCs as
they helped to develop future leaders, users were motivated to
take action in their communities and, most notably, by the
community building that it engendered.
Lastly, the
Independence outcome associated with community is the ability
to speak and be understood without the need for a translator.
Although more important to immigrants than other CTC users,
such independence lessens the demands on community
resources as fewer translators are required for medical
appointments or government and law enforcement interactions.
These types of activities are often the ones called out in major
policy initiatives targeted at underserved populations, yet CTCs
are rarely included in those discussions when policy is being
made. The challenge, then, is how to bring the voice of these
programs to the table when decisions are being made on policy
and funding issues. To frame this discussion, a situated logic
model was developed to provide a linkage between the policy
arena and the CTC impact areas on individuals, families and
communities [6].
Figure 1 shows how we related the program outcomes identified
in the study to the larger policy model for workforce related
issues.

Figure 1: Situated Logic Model for Workforce Development
In November 2007, Communities Connect Network organized
training events for CTC providers in conjunction with legislative
hearings, and arranged for the providers and the researchers to
present their results to the legislators. As a direct result of the
testimony and research, a bill was passed and signed into law
[8], defining Community Technology in the state of Washington
and allocating $500,000 for support of innovative programs
serving underrepresented populations.

REFERENCES
[1] Crandall, M., and Fisher, K. E. Forthcoming. Digital
Inclusion: Communicating Impact through Practice and
Research. Medford, NJ: Information Today.
[2] Durrance, J. C., and Fisher, K. E. 2005. How Libraries and
Librarians Help: A Guide to Identifying User-Centered
Outcomes. Chicago: American Library Association.
[3] Fisher, K. E., Marcoux, E., Miller, L. S., Sanchez, A., and E.
R. Cunningham. 2004. Information Behavior of Migrant
Hispanic Farm Workers and Their Families in the Pacific
Northwest. Information Research, 10.1, paper 199
[http://InformationR.net/ir/10-1/paper199.html]
[4] Glaser, B. G., and A.L. Strauss. 1967. The Discovery of
Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. New
York: Aldine Publishing.
[5] National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA). 2000. Falling through the Nnet:
Toward Digital Inclusion. Washington, DC.
[http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn00/contents00.html]
[6] Naumer, C. Forthcoming. Situated Logic Model: Using the
Model in the Real World. In Digital inclusion:
Communicating Impact through Practice and Research. M.
Crandall and K.E. Fisher, Editors). Information Today,
Medford, N.J.
[7] Naumer, C. M., Fisher, K. E., and B. Dervin. 2008. SenseMaking: A Methodological Perspective. Sensemaking
Workshop @ CHI 2008. ACM SIG CHI Conference,
Florence, Italy, April 6, 2008.
[http://dmrussell.googlepages.com/sensemakingworkshoppa
pers]
[8] S.B. 6438, 60th Leg., 2008 Reg. Sess. (Wash. 2008).

