Considering Craftsmanship
Daniela K. Rosner
UC Berkeley School of Information
102 South Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-4600
+1-510-642-1464

daniela@ischool.berkeley.edu
ABSTRACT
Craft involves the application of human skill and invested time.
Some have argued technology has undermined human expertise
by replacing craftwork with automation, disposing of human
ingenuity and proficiency. Can new technologies integrate skill,
materials and labor with the products of craft? How does
technology affect the use and significance of the crafted artifacts?
Conversely, how does the craft process engender cultural value
for creative practitioners? In this poster, I present a research
agenda for the study of craftsmanship in everyday creative
practice through new Information and Communication
Technology (ICT). In the design of new technology, I seek to
support the personal and social value of craft by extending the
skilled work of the creative practitioner.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2. [Information Interfaces]: User Interfaces — input devices
and strategies; interaction styles; user-centered design. D.2.2
[Software Engineering]: Design Tools and Techniques —User
interfaces. H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): Miscellaneous.

General Terms
Design.

Keywords
Craft, Craftsmanship, Everyday Creativity, Design Research

1. INTRODUCTION
Craft—the skilled manipulation of materials—is an integral part
of the human experience. Craft involves the connection between
materials and the human mind and senses, often mediated by a
technological tool. Tools for craft are wide-ranging, from
paintbrushes and potter’s wheels to computers and 3D printers.
Similarly, the nature of craft can vary: some crafts rely on
eyesight and physical manipulation using human hands; others
rely on smell or voice. Yet through emphasis on efficiency,
technology can undermine an individual’s creative expertise.
Automatic looms, for example, offer methods for easy
reproduction and decreased production costs, but at the expense of
flexibility in design choices, such as limiting 3D patterns.
Furthermore, automation of the weaving process displaces the
textile designer’s investment of time and creative skill. How can
designers of new technology consider the role of craftsmanship
and the social stakes involved in creative practice?
Today’s emerging craft practices have united with Do-it-Yourself
(DIY) activity in creative subcultures across America, such as the

CRAFT and MAKE1 communities. DIY encompasses a range of
personal design activities that have become increasingly prevalent
on the pages of blogs and online discussion forums. Using these
largely public resources (Instructables.com or Raverly.com2),
crafters discuss the intricacies of their work, tell stories around
craft, and codify their creative process for others to remake or
modify. Such ‘Everyday Creativity’ [11] has been an increasingly
fruitful area of study for HCI and Design. Recent research has
aimed to unearth motivations for customization and reuse (e.g.,
[11]), and to understand how DIY and craft cultures have affected,
and been affected by, the design of new Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) (e.g., [1]). Yet there has been
little effort to understand the role of invested time, skill and care
in relation to this creative work; that is, how ICT affect the
continued cultivation of creative expertise, and how creativity and
social relations can continue to be supported through craft. In this
poster, I propose an integration of craftsmanship in the study of
everyday creativity through the design of new ICT.

2. CRAFT & TECHNOLOGY
As a physical, skilled practice, craftwork has often been viewed in
opposition to advances in new technology [9]. The displacement
rather than disposal of labor is an often hidden outcome of new
technology, carrying deep social and cultural implications [7]. In
her critique of domestic technology, historian Susan Strasser has
argued [7] that the emergence of industry in America resulted in
more isolated labor for women, limiting the social relations
enabled through craft. Sociologist Ruth Schwartz Cowan [1]
furthers this critique, arguing that industrial advancements
brought new expectations for craftsmanship and cleanliness,
resulting in more housework for women. For example, with the
advent of industrially-produced clothing, middle class Americans
were able to own more clothing, thus replacing women’s weaving
and sewing with an increase in mending (a more isolated activity
reserved for the home rather than sewing circles). However, in
recognizing and celebrating the social value of human skill,
technology has the potential to help strengthen social ties during
productive practice.
The recent resurgence of craft practice reflects an effort to reclaim
personal time, skill, and control in a connected global economy.
First in the Arts and Crafts Movement of the early 20th century
and later in the 1960s, a romanticized reawakening of Craft was
provoked in the West. Manual labor has been continually
embraced for its investment human expertise. John Ruskin echoed
this sentiment, “For it is not the material, but the absence of
human labour, which makes the thing worthless” [4]. But perhaps
1

See http://makezine.com and http://craftzine.com.

2

Ravelry.com is a social networking site for knitters.

contrary to past craft movements, today’s practitioners often
appropriate new technology, using it as a means to share
curiosities, inspire new ideas, and communicate around craft.

3. RESEARCH AGENDA
Through a series of design interventions, I aim to better
understand how ICT can support crafters’ social interests. For
example, how can technology enable communication around
skilled, productive practice? How can such communication
strengthen ties between the craftsperson and the recipient of
craftwork? The design interventions will build on the first of my
design studies, the Spyn project—a tool that enables knitters to
attach digital messages to locations on yarn while knitting and
recall each message in relation to where it was recorded [10].
Spyn uses infrared ink printed on yarn to transparently correlate
locations on the fabric with events recorded while crafting. I
observed how knitters used Spyn to rethink their craft practice
while creating hats, scarves and sweaters for friends and family as
well as how the craft was reinterpreted by others. By allowing
knitters to encode social relations into yarn, people extended their
creative and communicative activity around craftwork (e.g.,
embedding a recipe into a scarf and documenting travels in a hat).
Expanding on this work in the domains of furniture customization
and everyday cooking, I intend to explore extensions of everyday
craftwork through technological expression. In addition to the
social, I want to explore the somatic and sensorial dimensions of
craft: how the craft process conditions affect and how craft
challenges the mind-body dualism brazen in technology’s
intellectual heritage. In order to study this interplay, I will observe
and build a socio-technical system for three craft-subcultures:
craft-knitters, Do-it-Yourself furniture builders, and everyday
cooks. In my study of knitting, I will consider its gendered and
domestic implications, its use in generational cultural
transmission, and the variance in technology use across
generations. Through a study of DIY furniture building, I will
examine notions of customization, reuse, and creativity, as well as
the seemingly less-gendered nature of the customization practice
(see Bean & Rosner 2008). Of particular interest is how the craft
of furniture customization is related to traditional notions of
artistry, which suggest an economy of means that requires
“getting the most out of a limited medium” (McCullough
1996:10). Finally, through a study of everyday cooking, I will
look at how the inherent ephemeral quality of food affects the
value of cooking and how the variety of physical sensations (taste,
smell, and sound) play into the craft process.
Each design intervention will involve three phases: First, I will
closely observe each craft practice by participating in craft events
(crafting circles and community fairs), interviewing individual
crafters, and visiting sites for craft both in person (homes, stores)
and online. Secondly, I will develop tools that extend the ways

each craft uses materials to mediate relationships with others, both
through the transfer of information around the making process as
well as the transformation of the craft products themselves. Third,
I will investigate how such tools affect the negotiation of identity
[5] and creativity through craft. How is craftsmanship influenced
through technological tools? When is it important for people to
disrupt the mechanical process? How do breakdowns in the
creative process shed light on the transfer of creative control?
Through the design of new tools for craft, I will investigate how
people transform the traditional medium of craft and expand
communication around the processes of craft with the hope of
inviting designers to rethink notions of craftsmanship in the
design of creative tools.

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my advisor, Prof. Kimiko Ryokai.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Bean, J., Rosner, D. To appear in Proc. ACM Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI), Apr 2009.
[2] Cowan, R.S., 1983. More Work for Mother: The Ironies of
Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the
Microwave. , Basic Books, New York.
[3] Hebdige, D. (1979), Subculture: The Meaning of Style,
Methuen, London.
[4] McCullough, Malcolm, (1996) Abstracting Craft: The
Practiced Digital Hand, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
[5] Mishler, E.G., 1999. Storylines: Craft artists’ narratives of
identity, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
[6] Obrist, Marianna. 2008. DIY HCI. VDM Verlag Dr. Mueller.
[7] Strasser, S. 1982. Never done. A history of American
housework. New York : Pantheon.
[8] Torrey, C., D. W. McDonald, B. N. Schilit and S. Bly.
(2007) How-To Pages: Informal Systems of Expertise
Sharing. Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (ECSCW 2007).
Springer. 391-410.
[9] Robertson, Seonaid Mairi (1961) Craft and Contemporary
Culture. Published by G.G. Harrap.
[10] Rosner, D. K., Ryokai, K., (2008) "Spyn: Augmenting
Knitting to Support Storytelling and Reflection." To appear
in Proceedings of Ubicomp '08.
[11] Wakkary, R., Maestri, L., Aspects of Everyday Design:
Resourcefulness, Adaptation, and Emergence (2008),
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, Vol.
24, Issue 5, pp 478-491.

