Critical

Ethnography

for

Information

Research

Lai Ma
School of Library and Information Science
Indiana University Bloomington
1320 E. 10th St., LI 011
Bloomington, IN 47405-3907

lama@indiana.edu

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.7.0 [The Computing Profession]: General.

General Terms
Theory

Keywords
Critical Ethnography, Information Research, Social Informatics,
Technology, Affordances

Poster Abstract
Research in Library and Information Science (LIS) often involves
the use of various types of information and of information
technology. As such, it is primarily concerned with problemsolving in social spaces (e.g., as manifested in user studies) and in
designing and troubleshooting of technological systems (e.g.,
research in information retrieval in general). Although most
information research is oriented towards some kind of problemsolving, its nature is not purely technical as many have perceived;
rather, it requires analyses of the interrelationship among human
(users), technology, and society. In other words, information
research is cultural and social in nature and it asks for the search
for “affordances” (which can be analyzed in terms of Heidegger’s
interpretation of Aristotle’s four types of causality) which bring
forth, for example, user needs and technology uses1. The widely
and commonly used quantitative methods, however, are not
sufficient for comprehensive analyses of cultural and social
phenomena or affordances because quantitative methods are
teleological in nature (often in a hypothetical-deductive manner).
The search for affordances begs for a critical and conceptual
space in research, on the one hand, and empirical approaches in
which the understanding of the cultural and the social are central
concerns, on the other. Critical ethnography is a critical and
empirical research methodology that encompasses these two
criteria.
Ethnographic methods are not new in information research—
researchers who investigate human-human and human-technology
interactions (e.g., those in the area of ‘information behavior,’

1

For a more detailed explanation of Heidegger’s analysis of the
four causes and their relations to technology and technique
(techne), see Day and Ma.

‘user studies’) are well aware of the importance of qualitative
research and have adopted methods such as observation,
interview, focus group study, and so on in their research projects.
How is critical ethnography different from more traditional
qualitative social research, then?
Methodologically, critical ethnography uses a form of
hermeneutic-reconstructive analysis: researchers make use of the
hermeneutic circle to attain intersubjective insider views for their
analyses of observational and interview data; at the same time,
researchers take into account their pre-understanding and prejudgment during the interpretative and reconstructive process.
That is to say, they must be aware of their initial interpretative
frameworks that may enable and also restrict interpretations. The
circular feature of the process leads to alterations in initial
interpretative frameworks so that they encompass those of the
culture, subculture of interest.
The very strength of critical ethnography is its capability in
explicating ideology and power relations by reconstruction of
meaning and conceptualization of social systems. In his book,
Critical Ethnography in Educational Research (1996),
Carspecken has provided a practical guide for doing critical
ethnography,
with
easy-to-understand
explanations
of
philosophical and theoretical backgrounds throughout the text.
His approach includes an application of Habermas’s
differentiation of three formal-ontological categories: subjective,
objective, and normative-evaluative for the analysis of meaning
and human interactions, on the one hand, and the differentiation
of sites, settings, locales, and social systems, on the other. The
theory of meaning core to this approach makes it possible to
reconstruct meanings at various levels, from meanings that are
obvious and discursively expressible for the members of a cultural
group (e.g., producers and users of information) to levels that
have significant effects but escape explicit awareness. The theory
of social sites and systems makes it possible to find explanations
for the prevalence of certain cultural and social forms of, for
example, information production and use, and to discover both
overt and latent functions served by these cultural and social
forms.
From a more theoretical perspective, critical ethnography opens
up ways of reconceptualizing “information.” For example, critical
researchers can look at information in the sense of “information as
thing” (Buckland, 1991), such as books, journals, cataloged
objects (such as the antelope described in Suzanne Briet’s What is

Documentation?) and so on. “Information as thing” is not an
objective entity (e.g., ‘facts,’ raw data, etc.) in the empiricist
sense; rather, they are cultural products resulting from a process
of objectivation and decontextualization. These processes are
associated with social practices of different cultural and
professional groups. As such, the production of information is
seen as part of the modern social system that serves certain
economic and political functions. The use of information, on the
other hand, may be viewed as the recontextualization of
information corresponding to the forms of life of different cultural
and professional groups of users. In sum, both the production and
use of information may be located within a theory of social
system and are related to the economic, political, and cultural
features of that system. The manner in which information is
produced, the type of “information” produced, as well as the
possible types of information that are not produced, can be
studied in terms of the cultures of producers and the relation of
these cultures to the economic and social locations of production.
This means, among other things, that information production must
be studied with a critical perspective. Similarly, information use
can be studied in terms of socially constructed needs, in terms of
“overt use” and “covert/latent” uses that escape the awareness of
users, but serve various system functions. A critical-ethnographic
framework makes it possible to study such things.

relevant information involves an understanding of users and their
relationship with contexts. Context, in turn, needs to be addressed
in terms of cultural affordances, including an examination of the
cultural horizons by which certain material forms and expressions
are considered to be “information.” In other words, we need to
understand the interrelationship among human (users),
technology, and society.

Thus, from a practical perspective, critical ethnography is
particularly useful for information behavior research and user
studies because it goes straight to the core concepts of these types
of research, namely, information needs, information seeking
behavior, context, and so on. Further, the conceptual framework
of critical ethnography can be used to research other areas of
information science, such as “epistemic culture” in the area of
scholarly communication, human-computer interaction (HCI),
and, of course, social informatics.

[2] Briet, S. 2006. What is documentation? In R. E. Day & L.
Martinet (Eds.), What is documentation? English translation
of the classic French text (pp. 9-46). Lanham, MD: The
Scarecrow Press.

To conclude, I argue that the practical concerns of information
research are not merely technical problems; rather, they are social
in nature—the working of a system or the successful retrieval of

Critical ethnography is a critical and an empirical research
methodology. Its approaches are based upon a solid theoretical
framework grounded in social critical theory. The methodology
can stand alone as a research method, as well as complement
other methods (both qualitative and quantitative) for social
research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Phil Carspecken and Ron Day for their
invaluable comments in this project and their encouragement and
support.
REFERENCES
[1] Buckland, M. K. 1991. Information as thing. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science 42(5), 351-360.

[3] Carspecken, P. F. 1996. Critical ethnography in education
research: A theoretical and practical guide. New York:
Routledge.
[4] Day, R. E., & Ma, L. (2009). Examining together social and
technological research in library and information science. To
be included in Proceedings of iConference 2009.

