Crosswalking IPL Metadata to Dublin Core
Michael Galloway, Michael Khoo, Xia Lin, Jung-ran Park
Drexel University
3141 Chestnut St.,
Philadelphia PA 19128
+1.215.895.2474
{mike.galloway, michael.khoo, xia.lin, jung-ran.park}@ischool.drexel.edu

ABSTRACT
The Internet Public Library (IPL) is crosswalking its metadata to
Dublin Core compliant metadata. This involves several research
activities, including: quantitative and qualitative analyses of the
existing IPL metadata; the creation of a new IPL metadata schema
as an application profile of Dublin core; the development of a new
database structure; and the development and testing of a new
metadata creation and maintenance interface. This poster
describes and provides illustrations of these activities.

1. THE INTERNET PUBLIC LIBRARY
The Internet Public Library (IPL: http://www.ipl.org) was created
in 1995 in a library and information science class taught by
Professor Joe Janes at the University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, to
see what “librarianship had to say to the networked environment
and vice-versa” [9]. Its success was such that the class decided to
keep the project going. More than a decade later, the IPL supports
and enhances library services through the provision of
authoritative collections, information assistance, and information
instruction for the public [8]. It is available throughout the United
States as a training tool for library and information science (LIS)
programs, and has trained over 5,000 students in 17 LIS programs
in tasks such as the creation and editing of metadata [7].
The IPL has subject-categorized collections of more than 40,000
online resources. These collections are the cumulative result of
work done by various students, volunteers, and staff members.
Most of the links on the IPL website are stored, along with
metadata describing them, in a MySQL database known as
Hypatia. Students, volunteers, and staff make maintain the
database through the Hypatia web interface, written in the Mason
and Perl programming languages. Most of the IPL’s own
webpages are generated by computer programs (or scripts) written
in Mason and Perl. These scripts assemble various pieces of data
and HTML code, such as links to external websites stored in the
Hypatia database long, along with the title and abstract metadata
describing those links, together into a complete webpage on the
IPL.

2. CROSSWALKING IPL METADATA
In January 2007, the IPL servers were moved to X University.
Subsequently, it was decided to crosswalk the existing metadata
to Dublin Core. Standards compliant metadata allow for metadata
exposure and harvesting and open up access to the
implementation of DC-compliant tools for metadata maintenance
and generation. Migration of IPL data to and from other systems
will be easier, and the integration of metadata from new IPL
partner collections (such as the Librarian’s Internet Index:
http://www.lii.org/) will be supported.

A number of factors will affect the quality of the crosswalk,
including the completeness, accuracy, and consistency [17] of
existing IPL metadata. A survey of these dimensions is currently
underway. With regard to completeness, a quantitative analysis of
the existing Hypatia database using SQL queries shows that a few
data fields (e.g. Title, URL, Abstract) are heavily used while other
fields are lightly used, and several metadata fields are frequently
neglected [c.f. 12, 16]. With regard to accuracy and consistency, a
qualitative analysis of IPL records by volunteers and students at
IPL consortium universities has begun, using an online form to
assess quality of the metadata in randomly selected records from
the Hypatia database. The first version of the tool is implemented
using Google Docs Forms (URL), which can be presented easily
in various online formats, provide built-in reporting features, and
can exported easily into an Excel spreadsheet or other commonly
used data formats. The form is available online [6]. Finally, an
analytical comparison of existing IPL and Dublin Core shows that
there is no direct field-to-field mapping between the two: fields
are labeled differently, defined differently, and may have the
same data recorded in different ways. A number of metadata
fields are particular to Hypatia only, and some of these are no
longer in use.

3. NEW IPL METADATA SCHEMA
Concurrent with these activities, a new IPL metadata schema was
created by applying the concept of application profile. The new
IPL metadata schema is designed to facilitate resource description
and discovery of networked Web resources. The IPL metadata
schema exploits the existing Dublin Core metadata element set
maintained by the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative [4], and also
contains IPL domain specific metadata elements and qualifiers. It
consists of four namespaces:
•
•
•
•

Dublin Core Metadata Element Set (DCMES Version 1.1)
Dublin Core Metadata Element Set (DCMES) Qualifiers
(2000-07-11)
IPL-defined Metadata Element Set (IPLMES)
IPL-defined Metadata Element Set (IPLMES) Qualifiers

IPL defined elements and qualifiers mostly concern
administrative and technical aspects of metadata (e.g., service
provider information, record information, user comments). These
elements and qualifiers will result in null mapping to Dublin
Core.
The Dublin Core metadata scheme offers flexibility built directly
into the framework. Different labels for DC element names,
specified element status across local guidelines (e.g., mandatory,
optional, repeatable) and best practices evidences the flexibility of
the Dublin Core metadata scheme [13]. The new IPL metadata
schema specifies element status and repeatability by taking the

IPL context into account. However, it should be noted that there
were many challenges in reaching consensus on metadata labels
and element status within the IPL Dublin Core compliance group.
Content designation rules and semantic aspects of IPL metadata
schema need to be further developed.

[6] IPL (2008). Metadata Evaluation Form.
http://training.ipl.org/div/backroom/col/module2/metadataev
alform.html

4. METADATA INTERFACE

[8] IPL (2008). The Mission and Vision Statements of the
Internet Public Library.
http://www.ipl.org/div/about/mission_and_vision.html

As outlined above, the quality of the crosswalked IPL metadata
will only be approximate, and will need to be reviewed and if
necessary edited. Work has started on a metadata creation and
maintenance interface to support this task. Three browser tabs or
windows are currently needed to accomplish this task: one for the
record, one for the external online resource, and one for the online
evaluation form. Early user testing suggests that the new interface
has to integrate the qualitative and quantitative analyses of the
crosswalked metadata within a single window [c.f. 10]. The
interface development will be a long term project that will require
careful design to result in a metadata tool that is useful and avoids
usability problems [3, 5, 11]. We will follow an iterative usercentered design process to develop and test the new metadata
interface. Initial prototypes and mock-ups will be tested in HCI
and metadata classes taught at the iSchool. Further development
of the interface will continue in 2009, supported by a grant from
the OCLC-ALISE Library and Information Science Research
Grant Program (LISGRP).

5. REFERENCES
[1] Barton, J., Currier, S., & Hey, J. (2003). Building Quality
Assurance into Metadata Creation. Dublin Core Conference
2003, 28th Sept - 2nd Oct, Seattle, WA, USA.
[2] Beall, J. (2004). Metadata and data quality problems in the
digital library. Journal of Digital Information 6(3).
[3] Crystal, A., & Greenberg, J. (2005). Usability of a metadata
creation application for resource authors. Library &
Information Science Research 27 (2005), 177-189.
[4] Dublin Core Metadata Inititive. Dublin Core Metadata
Element Set, Version 1.1:
http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/
[5] Greenberg, J., Crystal, A., Robertson, W., & Leadem, E.
(2003) Iterative design of metadata creation tools for
resource authors. Dublin Core Conference 2003, 28th Sept 2nd Oct, Seattle, WA, USA.

[7] IPL (2008). The IPL Class(es) Of…
http://www.ipl.org/div/class/

[9] Janes, J. (1998). The Internet Public Library: An Intellectual
History. Library Hi Tech. 16,2 (Issue 62) (1998), 56.
[10] Khoo, M., Devaul, H., and Sumner, T. (2002). Functional
Requirements for Groupware to Support Community-Led
Collections Building. 6th European Conference on Digital
Libraries, Rome, September 2002, pp. 190-203.
[11] Khoo, M. (2005). The Tacit Dimensions of User Behavior:
The Case of the Digital Water Education Library. JCDL ’05,
Denver, CO, June 7-11, 2005. Pp. 213-222.
[12] Moen, W. E., Miksa, S. D., Eklund, A., Polyakov, S., &
Snyder, G. (2006). Learning from artifacts: metadata
utilization analysis. JCDL ’06, Chapel Hill, NC, USA, June
11 - 15, 2006. Pp. 270-271.
[13] Park, J. (in press). Metadata Quality in Digital Repositories:
A Survey of the Current State of the Art. Cataloging and
Classification Quarterly Vo. 47 (January, 2009)
[14] Park, J., and Lu, C. (2008). A Comparative Analysis of
Metadata Creation Guidelines: Issues and Implications, 2008
ER&L Conference, Atlanta, GA, March 18-21, 2008.
[15] Park, J. (2006). Semantic Interoperability and Metadata
Quality: An Analysis of Metadata Item Records of Digital
Image Collections. Knowledge Organization 33(1), 20-34.
[16] Ward, J. (2003). A quantitative analysis of unqualified
Dublin Core metadata element set usage within data
providers registered with the open archives initiative. JCDL
2003, May 27-31, 2003, Houston, Texas. Pp. 315-317.
[17] Wilson, A. (2007). Toward releasing the metadata
bottleneck: a baseline evaluation of contributor-supplied
metadata. Library Resources and Technical Services 51(1),
16-28.

