Introduction
The purpose of my study is to find out if the construction of personal meaning from museum artifacts change with contextual variation.  From this statement the question I am asking is “How do children construct personal meaning from museum artifacts and how do they describe the artifacts in different formats? The “different formats” I am referring to are the online three-dimensional digital artifact versus the physical object and questioning if online representations of museum artifacts convey the ideas, values, and knowledge outcomes originally intended by the primary curator.   
The contextual variation I am observing of museum artifacts within the digital environment is the three-dimensional context specifically utilizing Arius3D technology. When describing what the three-dimensional environment is, Dr. Brad Eden, author of Information Visualization, indicates the one-dimensional context involves text only. Examples of the two-dimensional context are the pictures we see in paper and on computer screens. They exist as a flat object with no depth. The three-dimensional context goes beyond this because it incorporates depth or volume with the image. 
This is big picture, or the “So what?” of this study. That is “Do online representations of museum artifacts convey the ideas, values, and knowledge outcomes originally intended by the primary curator?” When the curator of a museum displays artifacts within an exhibit specific pieces are chosen and set up within the museum space with a specific goal in mind. The artifacts chosen by the curator are placed in public view and within a certain space contained in the museum on purpose. That purpose for the curator is to convey an idea or to tell a specific story about a particular culture the piece represents. There are certain knowledge outcomes the curator would like the museum visitor to leave with. These knowledge outcomes are going to differ from one person to another because of previous experiences every individual has had in the world. These experiences define how the world works and where one fits into that world as individuals. Artifacts are displayed within a museum environment for the purpose of conveying an idea or value held by a culture, thereby creating a knowledge outcome for the benefactor. This is why I am inquiring if the construction of personal meaning from museum artifacts changes with contextual variation. I am interested in determining if the ideas, values, and knowledge outcomes meant to be translated to the museum visitor via digital interface are translated? 
Framework and General Research Questions:

Museums display artifacts belonging to different historical societies and groups. Bodies of knowledge, beliefs, and value systems are displayed through the use of exhibits. The curator, when choosing artifacts to display within an exhibit is attempting to tell a specific story about people. When people visit the museum and view these different exhibits, one is incorporating what they see and constructing new knowledge based upon previous experience. Today’s museum traffic is measured in the millions because the online exhibit is seen as being just as important as the brick-and-mortar museum. 
Telecommunications has become a powerful tool for people to communicate and access information on a global level. Museums, according to Maurita Holland and Kari Smith from the University of Michigan (HYPERLINK "http://www.archimuse.com/mw99/papers/holland/holland.html"http://www.archimuse.com/mw99/papers/holland/holland.html) have found that curators and educators are studying how technology can increase the number of people to their collections and help researchers locate and access specific information they need regardless of time or location. The World Wide Web has further enabled people to not only consume information but also to produce information thereby adding to what can be found on the Web. It is in this light that the curator can connect the digital visitor to the artifact and how the visitor can partake in the construction of personal meaning from museum artifacts. But how does this construction of personal meaning change from the museum environment to the virtual one? With this concept in mind I am interested in knowing if the construction of personal meaning from museum artifacts changes with contextual variation. My problem statement is as follows: Museum curators convey stories through exhibits imposed with personal bias. A more inclusive narrative of museum artifacts can be conveyed with the incorporation of user feedback accomplished via user supplied descriptive tags. This project will explore the effect of context on learning experiences by studying the use of museum artifacts in two different settings: (1) Artifacts in the traditional museum environment and, (2) Artifacts in the three-dimensional digital environment created using Arius3D technology.
Museums act as a control mechanism in deciding what exhibit the visitor will see and the context within which one will see it.  A more holistic approach is needed in constructing cultural narratives. This research is going to investigate the similarities and differences in user supplied descriptive tags by answering the following questions: (1) What curatorial descriptors define the onsite artifact? (2) What curatorial descriptors define the three dimensional digital artifact? (3) What user descriptors define the onsite artifacts? (4) What user descriptors define the three dimensional digital artifacts?  (5) What are the similarities and differences between the descriptive tags provided by the curator and the user?









Christine M. Angel – University of South Carolina iConference Poster Presentation Abstract 2009


PAGE  


PAGE  2




