Dynamics of Polyphony in Social Classification:
An Exploration of an Anatomy
of Digital Linguistic Practice
Lilly U. Nguyen
UCLA
Department of Information Studies
GSE&IS Building, Box 951520
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1520

lillynguyen@ucla.edu
Keywords
Social classification, polyphony, discursive practice, heteroglossia

1. INTRODUCTION
As the information technologies grows and the digital online
spaces become increasingly popular places for social interaction,
we are confronted with new forms of sociality, practice, and
knowledge organization that defy traditional distinctions between
document, text, speech, language, and practice. This paper
presents a study of use and practices of a social classification
system, del.icio.us, through an overall theoretical approach that
draws from the disciplines of linguistic anthropology, a sociology
of interaction, speech act theory, and literary theory. From the
ensemble of these approaches, this pilot study tentatively
identifies an anatomy of social classification practices based on
speech genres of monologue and dialogue. The use of a linguistic
practice approach for the study of online classificatory practices is
informed by the recognition of convergence among documents,
text, language, and practice. The field of linguistic anthropology
has long made the argument that language both produces and
reflects social action. In turn, language is thus a reflection and
enactment of action. Language and action are fundamentally
intertwined and mutually constitutive. This idea is essential in
digital environments where action is solely evidenced through
textual forms of communication on-screen.

2. MONOLOGUE AND DIALOGUE IN
SOCIAL CLASSIFICATION
From this linguistic practice approach, it appears that individuals
are able to constitute and classify themselves into digital existence
through the kinds of digital classificatory practice in which they
engage. These digital linguistic practices can be distinguished in
terms of monologue and dialogue. Within monologic practice,
individuals typically use social classification systems as a space
for collecting and storing their digital documents. As such,
monologic practice consists of efforts to archive, remember, and
ensure memory. Individuals contribute and save content to
del.icio.us based on the notion that they might need it at a future
date and would thus like to be able to easily refind and access
their documents. With these efforts, monologue entails a kind of

communication to the self, where classification practices consist
of the present self communicating to an imagined future self.
In addition to monologue, we also find dialogue forms of
linguistic practice in social classification systems. While
monologue practices focus primarily on internal selfcommunication, digital dialogue in social classification systems
consist of utterances made based on imaginations and perceptions
of interlocutors, audience, and their extended digital social
network. As such, dialogue forms of practice help to weave
individuals within a larger social fabric. This is achieved primarily
through a play on voicing within the forms of commentary and
annotation. Within social classification systems, it appears that
dialogue manifests itself in several distinct forms: attribution,
quotation, description, and assessment. These four forms represent
a spectrum in which individuals animate others’ voices or actively
assert their own. At the far end of the spectrum, in the form of
attribution, the individual’s voice is barely present in their
classificatory practices. At the other end of the spectrum, in the
form of assessment, the individual’s voice is of primary
distinction.

3. DISCUSSION
The tentative findings from this study lay out a preliminary
framework for understanding the nature and dynamics of digital
linguistic practice. Using concepts of speech, language, and
practice, this study attempts to identify the nature and dynamics of
memory, social interaction, and information organization in an
online social classification system. In digital social classification
contexts, these private memory practices also happen concurrently
with public acts of information sharing and recommendation. In
turn, monologue and dialogue consists simultaneously of
collecting information and organizing information. Dialogic
practice in social classification systems thus consists of a series of
speech genres such as quotation, attribution, description, and
assessment. These speech genres reflect the various ways in which
individuals negotiate the multiple authorial voices within their
documents. In this view, social classification systems appear to
accommodate and explicitly render the polyphonic nature of
linguistic practice. This suggests that social classification systems
have been designed in such a manner such that individuals are
able to represent the plurality of voices that are embedded within
any given document.

Heteroglossia in this digital environment includes the voice of the
individual tagger-collector, the voice of the document, the voice
of the document’s author, and the voice of recommender. The
continual switching of voicing demonstrates how oftentimes in
our speech we do not speak from our own original voice.
Following Erving Goffman’s work on footing [1], examples of
quotation in social classification demonstrate the ways in which
individuals are able animate the voice of others in their digital
utterances. This ability to call forward multiple voices can be seen
as a kind of corporal displacement that is also complemented by a
temporal negotiation in which individuals manage their records
and documents of their past and present based on their
anticipation of the future. This is seen in the participants’ use of
future action tags as well as in their diary forms of annotation. In
this way, linguistics practices in social classification systems are
ideal examples of the ideas of polyphony in linguistic
anthropology, sociology of interaction, and notions of intertextuality in literary theory.

4. CONCLUSION
Subsequently, the micro-narratives that emerge from these digital
practices constitute a form of self-inscription in which individuals
constitute themselves through digital speech. Through this

performative quality, individuals are able to create their digital
selves through their digital speech. Individuals are able to
constitute their digital selves through the very acts of collecting
information and writing public commentary. As a result,
individuals are able to write and classify themselves into digital
existence. In part with this performativity, I would argue further
that digital linguistic practice is, in part, informed by larger
processes of interpellation in which individuals recognize
themselves as subjects of address by choosing to speak and
articulate their own voices. Moreover, if we extend this corporal
metaphor, we can argue that speech genres form the underlying
anatomy of the digital body and the digital self.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Goffman, E. 1981. Forms of Talk. Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania Press.

