Eagles e-Health Project for UNCFSP/NLM HBCU ACCESS Project
Dr. Deborah Swain, Dr. Gabriel Peterson, Derek Brinson, MIS, and Jamaal Fisher, School of Library and Information Sciences
North Carolina Central University

Introduction
This poster summarizes our report on the 2007-2008
Eagles e-Health project at North Carolina Central
University. We took a cross-disciplinary and
innovative team approach to training the NCCU
campus and the off-campus health community in the
use of the National Library of Medicine’s (NLM )online resources to access health information. The
faculty, students, and community partners
contributing to the project are from Public Health
Education, Library and Information Sciences and
Psychology disciplines. Over 20 community partners
in the NC Health and Wellness Trust Fund’s Health
Disparities Initiative are also represented on the
project.

Background
Alongside race and ethnicity, an important factor
contributing to health disparities is the degree to
which people understand health information and can
successfully navigate the health care system (NC
Health Literacy Report, 2007). NC has a high
percentage of individuals with low literacy levels.
Increasing access to quality health information and
improving health literacy levels are critical issues.
Examined within the context of lower socio-economic
status (SES), health disparities may result from a
"knowledge gap" often observed in racial and ethnic
minority communities (Finnegan, 2002).

Eagles e-Health Project
The Eagles e-Health project took a broad and comprehensive
approach to increase the utilization of the NLM on-line resources by
NCCU students, faculty, staff, and a network of local and statewide
community partners. The study had 3 parts:
(1)Develop and deliver training; (2)Collect data on intervention
effectiveness and (3)Analyze and report results. The project first
focused on training a core team of faculty, staff, undergraduate, and
graduate students to use NLM databases to research health issues.
This group developed workshops to disseminate information about
accessing and using the “www.nlm.org .” Fifteen workshops were
held. On campus, student organizations, classes, faculty volunteers,
and interested staff participated. Both undergraduate and graduate
students participated. Off-campus partners included over 22
statewide community partners who are addressing a wide range of
health issues: diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, obesity.
These community partners are participating in the NCCU Health
Disparities Initiative (HDI) funded by the NC Health and Wellness
Trust Fund (HWTF).
Qualitative and quantitative methods were used to collect data and
research the presence and scope of a “knowledge gap” that may
affect the utilization of on-line NLM health resources among racial
and ethnic minorities in NC. The outcomes-based methodology
applied required written pre-tests be administered to determine
awareness of online health information and skill levels. A post-test
questionnaire was provided about a month later.

Acknowledgements
NCCU Students
Derek Brinson, MIS
Jamaal Fisher, MLS

NCCU Faculty
Deborah Swain, Ph.D.
Gabriel Peterson, Ph.D.
(LaHoma Romocki, Ph.D. –PI)

NC Health Disparities Initiative
Initiative
Linda King
Denise Belle

References
Finnegan, J., School of Public Health Advances at the University of
Minnesota. Available at http://www.sph.umn.edu on 7/15/06.
North Carolina Health Literacy Report. Institute of Medicine, 2007.

This work is funded by the United Negro College Fund Special
Projects Corporation (ACCESS Project).

To reach the attendees after the hands-on workshops, students helped
create the on-line post-test questionnaire. In addition, to measure
learning, an on-line basic proficiency test was developed for. Finally,
public health education faculty were invited to participate in followup interviews to collect qualitative data. See results on handout.

