Evolution of the Social Structure of Nanotechnology
Staša Milojević
University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Information Studies
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1520

stasa@ucla.edu

ABSTRACT
New disciplines require the presence of a social infrastructure for
the research to become institutionalized. I study the change of
structural arrangements to determine the social development of
nanotechnology as an emerging discipline. In order to understand
structural properties of social infrastructure, I have conducted the
empirical study of the time evolution of co-authorship network of
scientists in nanotechnology. In particular I have examined static
topological properties of networks and underlying dynamical
processes leading to particular topologies.

The problem of empirical delineation of a discipline in this study
is to a great extent addressed by using a database of field-specific
publications. Namely, I built networks using data on half a
million nanotechnology articles covering 35 years (1970-2004)
from NanoBank database at UCLA. The articles have been
selected from Science Citation Index Expanded, Social Science
Citation Index , and Arts and Humanities Citation Index using
two methods: search for 379 predefined terms and probabilistic
procedure for the automatic identification of terms [3]. My dataset
contains over 460,000 different authors, or more precisely distinct
names in a database. After evaluating the uncertainty due to
author name disambiguation, I decided to use author’s last name
and all the initials as a unit of analysis.

My analysis is based on non-directed networks where the nodes
are authors who have collaborated (coauthors), edges are
coauthoring events, and the edge weight is the number of articles
on which the two authors have collaborated. For the time period
studied the number of coauthors varies from 255 in 1970-71 to
184,448 in 2003-2004. Since the fraction of non-connected
authors, i.e. authors who have not coauthored at all, has been
declining from 11-12% in the 1970s and early 1980s to less than
2% in 2004, the number of researchers that cannot be studied with
coauthorship networks is relatively small. Therefore, it is safe to
say that that the results obtained by the analysis of coauthorship
networks can be used to make inferences about the social
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Conference’04, Month 1–2, 2004, City, State, Country.
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0004…$5.00.

structure of the field as a whole.

The distribution of the number of papers people publish and the
number of authors per paper are considered two primary
constraints on the shape of the collaboration network [1]. The
average number of collaborators per author in nanotechnology has
been increasing, especially since 1990s, reaching 13.7 and 15.8
collaborators per author (for 1995-99 and 2000-04, respectively).
The number of collaborators per author is strongly related with
the number of authors per paper (R2=0.86) as well as with author
productivity (R2=0.83). However, the productivity is not
independent from the number of authors per article, but is very
tightly correlated (R2=0.93), making the correlation between the
coauthorship and productivity more fundamental than the
correlation of each with the level of collaboration.

For each author in coauthorship network we can get the number
of authors connected to it (i.e. the degree of a node). The degree
distribution is the probability distribution of these degrees over
the whole network. The analysis of two most recent time periods
(1995-99 and 2000-04) shows that most authors have three
collaborators, which gives scale to the distribution. The number of
authors with an increasing number of collaborators falls
monotonically in a power-law fashion. The part of the distribution
below 20 collaborators follows very closely the lognormal
distribution The lognormal distribution stops being a good model
when there are 20 or more collaborators per author. From that
point the power law is an excellent description of the distribution.

A cluster is defined as a subset of nodes interconnected by links.
The largest cluster is also known as a giant component. In
nanotechnology the largest component started very small and
similar in size to the 2nd largest component, but increased
dramatically in 1980-85. In 1995-99, the largest component grew
to >80%, reaching the size similar to giant components in other
established scientific disciplines [2]. The existence of a giant
component indicates wide-ranging collaboration not constrained
by research specialty. The formation of the giant component in
this study coincides with generally held view that nanotechnology
formed as a field in the early 1990s. The robustness of the giant
component was tested by random removal of constituents of the
network. The results show that the giant component falls below
50% only after 93% of the original number of actors are removed.

This shows that the giant component is not sensitive to a
significant removal of its structural elements.

The shortest path is the path (a collection of edges that connect
two nodes) that passes through the minimal number of other
nodes. The network diameter is the longest distance between the
researchers connected by collaboration ties. Except for the first
time interval, before the recognized emergence of
nanotechnology, this separation has been steadily decreasing,
despite the enormous growth of the field (researchers in
collaboration network) and is currently (2000-04) around 6. In
other words, for authors in the giant component (which represents
90% of all authors) we need on average 6 and a maximum of 23
steps to connect one to another. Small-world structure enables
quick and efficient transmission of information.

I confirm the emergence in the 1990s of the robust giant
component and of small-world structure in the coauthorship
networks in the field of nanotechnology. These results indicate
that nanotechnology has formed as a field at that time.

Keywords
Co-authorship networks,
networks, nanotechnology.

network

topology,

small-world

1. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Certain data included herein are derived from Nanobank (Lynne
G. Zucker and Michael R. Darby, Nanobank Data Description,
release 1.0 (beta-test), Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Center for
International Science, Technology, and Cultural Policy and
Nanobank, Jan 17, 2007.) and from the Science Citation Index
Expanded, Social Sciences Citation Index, and Arts & Humanities
Citation Index of the Institute for Scientific Information®, Inc.
(ISI®), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: © Copyright Institute
for Scientific Information®, Inc. 2006. All rights reserved.

2. REFERENCES
[1] Moody, J. 2004. The structure of a social science
collaboration network: Disciplinary cohesion from 1963 to
1999. American Sociological Review 69(2): 213-238.
[2] Newman, M. E. J. 2004. Who is the best connected scientist?
A study of scientific coauthorship networks. Complex
networks. E. Ben-Naim, H. Frauenfelder and Z. Toroczkai.
Berlin, Springer: 337–370.
[3] Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, et al. 2006. Minerva unbound:
Knowledge stocks, knowledge flows and new knowledge
production. NBER Working Paper No. 12669.

