Examining Social and Technological Research in Library
and Information Science
Ronald E. Day
School of Library and Information Science
Indiana University Bloomington
1320 E. 10th St., LI 011
Bloomington, IN 47405-3907
1-812-855-2018

roday@indiana.edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper we employ a philosophical-historical approach
toward understanding (Library and) Information Science as both a
social and a technological science. We do this, via Martin
Heidegger’s works, by returning to the etymological roots of
technique and technology, the Ancient Greek term techne, and
through this we see how this term has been diametrically
characterized in the Western philosophical tradition. We propose
an account of socio-technical and technological causality that
explains (L)IS technical and technological research in terms of
cultural-social, as well as material and professional, affordances,
rather than as determinative causation. Our argument aims not
only to contribute an understanding of the role of social and
technological research in the field, but also to begin a critique of
some quantitative and qualitative research in the field.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.7.0 [The Computing Profession]: General.

General Terms
Documentation, Standardization, Languages, Theory

Keywords
Information Research, Critical Information Theory, Social
Informatics, Technology, Affordances

1. INTRODUCTION
It is well-known that there is a wide spectrum of what can be
characterized as ‘information research.’ In the field of (Library
and) Information Science ((L)IS) there are such research areas as
user studies, information behavior, information architecture,
information representation and organization, information
retrieval, and so on. Information research has also been
undertaken by scholars in the social studies of science and
technology, particularly in the area of information infrastructure
(for example, Bowker and Star 2000; Bowker, 2005) and artificial
intelligence, such as medical informatics (for example, Forsythe
2001). More recently, there has been concern about the social
importance of information research, and as a result, the

Lai Ma
School of Library and Information Science
Indiana University Bloomington
1320 E. 10th St., LI 011
Bloomington, IN 47405-3907
1-812-855-2018

lama@indiana.edu
emergence of the research area of social informatics. But, what is
the relationship between information research and the ‘social’?
And, how is the ‘social’ important for information research?

2. INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY
Information research, by its very name, sounds to be engaged in
research about information. Consequently, it is natural that much
of the conceptual and critical work in information research during
the past thirty or so years has focused on definitions of
information and information science (for example, Bates 1999,
2005, 2006; Brookes 1980; Buckland 1991; Hjørland 2006;
Saracevic 1991, 1999). The discussion of the concept of
information is very important—for an articulation of the
epistemological and ontological assumptions of the concept of
information would explicate how the concept has informed
information research, and an analysis of the uses of the word
“information” would show how it has shaped a certain kind of
thinking and ideology in our day-to-day activities and in our
professional activities as information professionals and
information researchers (see, for example, Day 2001; Frohmann
2004).
Most of the research in (L)IS, however, is not purely conceptual
and it is usually not critical. Rather, it involves the study of the
use and/or efficiency of various types of information and of
information technology. For example, information architecture is
concerned with the design of information infrastructure, with this
latter term meaning entities such as web pages and databases;
information representation and organization are concerned with
how data are represented and organized in a systematic way for
computerized systems; information retrieval is concerned with
devising algorithms for the successful retrieval of information. In
other words, most of information research is not an analysis of
information as a term, but rather, it is an analysis of different
things called “information” in their design, configuration and use,
often involving technologies that are then referred to as
‘information technologies.’ As such, information research is often
seen in terms of ‘user’ research into information problem solving,
particularly, problem solving in different social spaces:
organizations, public spaces, virtual spaces, schools, etc. In turn,
however, information research also involves problem solving in
designing and troubleshooting technological systems that aid the
problem solving of users. Thus, technological problem solving in

information science doesn’t just involve engineering skills in
system building and troubleshooting, but it tends to begin and end
with the problems that users and producers encounter.
Can we conceive of a manner of conceptually analyzing these two
aspects of information science ‘empirical’ research? If we could
we would be opening up a conceptual ‘meta-theoretical’ avenue
other than that of a critique of the obfuscation and reification of
the term ‘information’ in the midst of a plethora of its social and
professional deployments.
We would like to open up such an analysis by explicating the
‘social’ in terms other than that of determinative causality
between ‘users’ and ‘technology,’ and, ‘technology’ and ‘users.’
We seek an analysis that can provide a unitary framework for
analyzing both ‘social’ and ‘technological’ research in
information science. Given that social analysis is often viewed in
causal terms borrowed from physics—that is, causation
understood as the determinate force exerted by one body upon
another, and as such, ‘users’ making use of technologies to
‘effect’ resulting products, technology’s ‘effects’ upon society,
and so forth—is there a way of rethinking social causation in
other terms than causes and effects? Such an analysis would, as
well, give us a different interpretation of social informatics than
has been the traditional understanding and it would open social
informatics to new (and to previous, akin) research projects. It
would inject more a form of cultural analysis into analyzing
‘social situations.’ Together, cultural forms and social situations
form two durational axes—a long duration (tradition) and a short
duration (site specificity)—that are necessary for considering
meaningful action. (We here include Harré’s (2004) third axis of
indexicality as a combination of the two previous in moments of
radical temporality governed by, on the one hand, necessity, and
on the other hand, choice.) Social Informatics is doomed if it
treats actors as mere determinate causes or effects of ‘technology’
or ‘information’ without accounting for the intentionality of the
actors and the affordances for their expressive production.
In the following we offer a starting point for rethinking the social
in relation to techniques and to technologies. We do so from the
viewpoint of rethinking social causation according to what
Aristotle termed “formal” causation, rather than according to the
“efficient” causation that we discussed above, as the norm for
social analysis. In this manner, we will also be asking that social
research take into greater account those practices of cultural
research approaches, namely, those that stress forms or
“affordances” for expression and emergence. We wish to
emphasize rethinking the techne of (Library and) Information
Science according to their affordances.
In this paper, we will begin such an analysis through a reading of
the beginning of the German philosopher, Martin Heidegger’s,
1953 article, “The Question Concerning Technology” [1977b].
Heidegger’s analysis offers an understanding of technique and
technology as emergences and expressions indebted to four types
of affordances. Whatever the limitations of Heidegger’s account
may be, it does provide a substantial, historically grounded
account of the cultural meaning of technology over a long
duration, and, thus, provides a useful and rare account of the role
of cultural meaning in our understanding of human and
technological interaction and co-development.

3. TECHNE
The relation between ‘technique’ and ‘technology’ warrants our
consideration, not the least because in many modern Western
European languages the difference between these two terms is not
as strong as in English, deviating less from the original Ancient
Greek term, techne, which etymologically unites the two former
terms. “Techne” in the Ancient Greek means an art or craft
whereby something emerges into appearance (poiesis). Thus,
from the perspective of Ancient Greek philosophy up through the
use of many modern Western European languages, in speaking
about any production we must start with the relation of techne to
creation.
In his lecture and then essay, “The Question Concerning
Technology” [1977b], Heidegger discusses techne’s role in
expression and production, and he does so by examining the
philosophically and culturally important Aristotelian discussion of
the four types of causality (the first or formal, the material, the
efficient, and the final causes) in Aristotle’s Physics. In
Heidegger’s essay [1977b], Aristotle’s four causes are
reinterpreted from their understanding in Latin and modern
philosophy as causa back to what Heidegger claims is their
proper understanding in Ancient Greek philosophy, understood in
terms of the Greek, aition. Heidegger reads aition in terms of
indebtedness. This reading goes against the grain of the
philosophical tradition since, at least, the period of Latin
philosophy. It is a reading that reinterprets Aristotle’s four causes
and the meaning of techne and poiesis according to the four
causes’ interdependences on one another. It also stresses the
causes as mutually important, co-responsible affordances to
which the emergent thing is indebted. This reading stands in
contrast to the traditional deterministic and teleological reading of
the four causes (where an ideal “first cause” is understood as an
origin that is fulfilled in the final product (the “final cause”), visà-vis efficient and material causes, with each cause being read as
a determinate force; hence, with the efficient cause—understood
as determinate force—being understood as the dominant
characteristic cause throughout the teleological chain of
causation.)
In the Latin tradition, Aristotle’s four causes are read as
teleological and determinative of each upon the other as a
sequence of events. Such a reading would yield, for example, the
following analysis of creation or production (to use an easy-tounderstand example): the blueprint for a house (first or formal
cause: an originary form or idea to be completed in an
actualization), the material causes (bricks, plumbing, etc.), the
efficient cause (labor), and the final ‘cause’ or result (the actual
house itself as an actual fulfillment of the original idea). In
contrast, according to Heidegger’s [1977b] rereading of causa by
aition, the four causes are read as follows: Aristotle’s “first” or
“formal” cause is understood as the cultural ‘context’ or forms,
social situation and needs, and the resulting plan for what is to be
created; the efficient cause is understood as the craftsperson or
other human agency for bringing about the object; the material
cause is understood as the matter that makes up the object; and
the final cause is understood as the reception and purpose for
which the thing is brought forward. Together, these are
understood as a total assemblage of socio-cultural, material, and
labor affordances that allow an object to emerge. Such an object

is the product of a craft or art (techne), which is the human
manner of bringing things forth (poiesis). The object is indebted
to these affordances for its emergence. It is an expression through
these affordances.
The pivotal point in this argument is that Aristotle’s first cause is
reread by Heidegger as meaning forms for emergence and
expression—affordances—rather than being an ideal blueprint for
an actual product, as in the Platonic tradition or, equally, in the
Latin tradition. This rereading of the first cause also permeates
Heidegger’s rereading of all the other causes, that is, his reading
of them as different types of affordances. Determinate causes are
replaced by a notion of cause as affordance. Affordances are
forms that the object is indebted to for emerging as a certain type
of thing—with material properties, social intentions, cultural
expressions, and a site-specificity and time-value to its production
and use. Heidegger’s analysis reinserts situated action into
production. He returns historicity—and, consequently, historical
analysis—to the produced object. But a reread notion of “formal
causes”—that is, as affordances—allows situated action to be
understood in a non-mentalistic manner.
It should be mentioned that one of the consequences of
Heidegger’s interpretation is that content-container metaphors
that function in the idealist Latin understanding of the four
causes—that is, the four causes as the teleological realization of a
‘first,’ ideal essence contained in a representation—are left
behind. Textual or other representations, instead of “containing” a
‘theoretical’ idea that is then realized in ‘practice,’ are viewed as
cultural forms for expression, themselves being forms of practice.
In Heidegger’s analysis, there is no “epistemic content”
[Frohmann 2004] in formal plans, which is then realized in an
object.
It would be taking us a bit afield and would require too in-depth
an analysis for this paper to retrace the important relationships
between our modern understandings of art and other types of
works and techne in Heidegger’s oeuvre [for this, see Day 2008].
What is necessary, here, however, is to recognize what is most at
stake for our present topic in Heidegger’s reinterpretation of the
four causes: 1) production is re-understood culturally-socially,
and 2) social events are understood in terms of mutual
affordances, rather than as determinate forces or causes of agents
acting upon one another and upon objects or vice versa. This
affects modern technological and technical studies in that techne
is understood to underlie both. Both technique and technology in
(L)IS are cultural-social in nature, being made up of actions and
parts arranged and used for producing meaningful acts and
products. For Heidegger, technological modernity is characterized
as the metaphysical understanding of creation as determinative
and teleological, leading from ideal frames for knowledge and
object production to the realization of those ‘theories’ in actual
‘practices’ and ‘products.’ It is a production that privileges an
ideal and reproducible production over a site-specific and timevalued, self-reflective, historical praxis.
The result of this critique is strongly felt in a very late essay, “The
End of Philosophy and the Task of Thinking” [Heidegger 1977a],
where Heidegger contrasts this analysis of techne against what he
terms, “the thesis of the precedence of method,” a phrase that he
uses to characterize the nature of modern research, as well as
modern life dominated by scientific-technological production.
The “thesis of the precedence of method,” for Heidegger, is the

modern assumption that method assures an ‘objective’ and
reproducible ‘truth’ in research, just as technological production
assures the reproducible certainty of the object’s production.
Social research and technological production proceed by
establishing frames for research and production and attaining
products based on strict methods. Those methods may involve
material or semiotic tools of any sort. What is not as of much
importance in modern research and technological production is
the critical evaluation of the relation of production to its
affordances or a cultural understanding of the affordances
themselves.
For Heidegger, the mistaken importance of modern research is
that of the precedence of method as an assurance for rigor and
reproducibility in its research production. In turn, such methods
themselves must be rigorous and reproducible. Standardization is
thus assured, even if this means turning the cultural affordances of
things and events into causa for attaining results in research or
technological production. Often, social science research involves
treating meaning as quantifiable and attributing determinate
causes (physiological or social) to intentions (see not only
Heidegger’s work, but with a much clearer epistemological focus,
Rom Harré’s work as well (for example, Harré, 2004)). For
Heidegger, in fact, all of modernity, including modern research, is
involved in modern technological production, in the sense that it
is involved in the production of products that rigorously and
consistently follow from the guiding frames of theoretical
‘blueprints.’ What is lacking, Heidegger is arguing, is an
awareness of the cultural affordances that underlie this, including
the cultural metaphysics that reach from the Latin period through
modernity. The Latin rereading of aition by causa must, for
Heidegger, be seen as cultural affordances that allow the
metaphysical tradition to emerge and embed itself in our
understandings of technique and technology. Philosophical
metaphysics is, thus, only one—though a condensed and thus
exemplary substantiation—of what we might call a “cultural
metaphysics.”
Studies of the concept of information in (L)IS often begin with
different ontologies of information—following from the different
senses given to the word “information” in ordinary and/or (L)IS
discourses—and then they proceed to show how these different
ontologies or senses of “information” cannot be unified, but are
supported by different research “approaches.” Such research has
difficulty linking ontological critique to epistemological critique.
In the sciences, “approaches” are called “methods,” and they tend
toward internal consistency and rigor, as well as—sometimes and
ideally (depending on the discipline—a priori or a posteriori)—
toward external consistency and rigor in application. From the
perspective of Heidegger’s analysis, at the least, it may be more
beneficial to view ontologies of information as arising from
methods and epistemologies within the sciences, as well as from a
broader range of discourses in popular culture. Ontological
critique follows from an epistemological critique of the
‘approaches’ adopted.
We would be amiss, however, not to point to a recent
expressionist and emergence tradition in information research
wherein affordances are accounted for, even if the full
consequences for the social science tradition, and, possibly, the
technological traditions, in (L)IS are not fully acknowledged. This

is a view of the social sciences that sees social research as
qualitative and ethnographic (we recognize some of this occurring
very lately in ‘information behavior’ research, particularly in its
constructionist occurrences, and in the theorization of ‘positioning
theory’ [Given, 2005]). Here, agents, materials, and objects are
seen as forms for expression and emergence. In LIS, however, we
have also seen some poor and misleading examples of
ethnographic research, with the old specters of universalist claims
and determinative causality haunting qualitative research, as
much as it did previous quantitative research.
Further, what has been lacking in (L)IS research as a whole has
been the awareness that critical conceptual research in (L)IS has
been, essentially, the forcing of a cultural-historical mode of
analysis back onto the term “information” itself as well as other
foundational terms and concepts in the field.. Such a
misunderstanding has, perhaps, occurred because some of the
conceptual studies in (L)IS are not nothing other than attempts to
provide (L)IS with some sort of ‘philosophical’ or academic
‘foundations.’ These latter attempts are done for political or
sociological reasons, not for philosophical ones, for the functions
of philosophy in regard to (L)IS are to clear up conceptual
confusions and/or to create concepts that aid in our understanding
of what such a field may and may not be or what the term
“information” can or cannot mean, socially, culturally, and
professionally.

4. CONCLUSION
In this paper we employ a philosophical-historical approach
toward understanding (Library and) Information Science as both a
social and a technological science. We have done this, via Martin
Heidegger’s works, by returning to the etymological roots of
technique and technology, the Ancient Greek techne, and we have
seen how this term has been diametrically characterized in the
Western philosophical tradition. We have proposed an account of
socio-technical and technological causality that explains (L)IS
technical and technological research in terms of cultural-social, as
well as material and professional, affordances, rather than as
determinative causation.
REFERENCES
[1] Bates, M. J. 1999. The invisible substrate of information
science. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science 50(12), 1043-1050.
[2] Bates, M. J. 2005. Information and knowledge: An
evolutionary framework for information science. Information
Research, 10(4) paper 239 [Available at
http://InformationR.net/ir/10-4/paper239.html]
[3] Bates, M. J. 2006. Fundamental forms of information.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology 57(8), 1033-1045.
[4] Bowker, G. C. 2005. Memory Practices in the Sciences.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

[5] Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. 2000. Sorting Things Out:
Classification and its Consequences. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
[6] Brookes, B. C. 1980. The foundations of information
science: Part I philosophical aspects. Journal of Information
Science 2, 125-133.
[7] Buckland, M. K. 1991. Information as thing. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science 42(5), 351-360.
[8] Day, R. E. 2001. The Modern Invention of Information:
Discourse, History, and Power. Carbondale, IL: Southern
Illinois University Press.
[9] Day, R. E. 2008. Works and representation. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology
59(10), 1644-1652.
[10] Forsythe, D. E. 2001. Studying Those Who Study Us: An
Anthropologist in the World of Artificial Intelligence.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
[11] Frohmann, B. 2004. Deflating Information: From Science
Studies to Documentation. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.
[12] Given, L. M. 2005. Positioning theory: A framework for
information behaviour research. In Theories of Information
Behavior: A Researcher’s Guide, K. E. Fisher, S. Erdelez,
and L. McKechnie, Eds. ASIST (Information Today, Inc.),
Medford, NJ, 334-338.
[13] Harré, R. 2004. Staking our claim for qualitative
psychology as science. Qualitative Research in Psychology
1, 3-14.
[14] Heidegger, M. 1977a. The end of philosophy and the task of
thinking. In Basic Writings: from Being and Time (1927) to
The Task of Thinking (1964). New York, Harper & Row,
370-392.
[15] Heidegger, M. 1977b. The question concerning technology.
In The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays.
New York, Harper and Row, 3-35.
[16] Hjørland, B. 2006. Information: Objective or
subjective/situational? Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 58(10), 1448-1456.
[17] Saracevic, T. 1991. Information science: Origin, evolution
and relations. In Conceptions of library and information
science: Historical, empirical and theoretical perspectives,
P. Vakkari and B. Cronin, Eds., London, Taylor Graham, 527.
[18] Saracevic, T. 1999. Information science. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science 50(12), 10511063.

