Exploring Impacts on Older Adults’ E-Services Usage
Johanna L.H. Birkland
Syracuse University
245 Hinds Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-4100
001 + 1 + 315 443 2911

jlbirkla@syr.edu
ABSTRACT
By 2050, over one fifth of the U.S. population will be age 65 or
older [17], suggesting increased pressure on our societies to
ensure that the needs of older adults are met. Not only are our
societies aging, but technology has become pervasive in many of
the processes upon which older individuals depend.
An example of the impact that technology has had on older adults
is the rise of governmental e-services. E-services have been
defined as “interactive software-based information systems” that
are accessed via the internet or through other forms of technology
[7]. Examples of e-services that impact older individuals include
the Help America Vote Act, which requires all states in the US to
implement electronic voting by 2012 [8] and the digitalization of
Medicare benefits [18]. However, research has demonstrated that
older adults use Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs) less than younger adults suggesting that many older adults
are not benefiting from these digitalized e-services [5, 11]. In the
case of e-voting, are actually discouraged from voting when
technology is used [14].
Several studies have examined e-services usage by the general
population [6, 7], while other studies have examined the factors
that influence older adult usage of ICTs [5, 11, 12]. Each of these
studies implicates several different factors thought to affect usage,
and it is unclear if these factors are related, or if some factors are
antecedents of others. Additionally, in the e-services literature,
there has been a concentration on exploring individual’s intent to
use e-services [6, 7], rather than their actual use. It is possible that
for older adults, there are impacts that prevent those who intend to
use a technology from doing so. This abstract proposes a study to
understand the full array of factors affecting older adults usage of
e-services, including how these factors are related.

1.1 Previous Research on Older Adults, ICTs,
and E-Services
Research relevant to the study of factors influencing e-service
usage by older adults includes previous research on older adults
and ICT usage and more general research focusing on adults of all
ages that examines e-services usage.

1.1.1 Previous Research: Impacts on Older Adults’
ICT Usage
Studies on the impacts of older adults ICT usage have mainly
focused on computer and the internet use. Confirmed impacts on
older adults computer and internet usage have included computer
anxiety, types of intelligence (crystallized and fluid) [3], attitudes
towards technology [5, 11], and self efficacy regarding technology
[12]. Other factors impacting older adult ICT usage have included
external reasons (because they received the technology as a gift),

affective reasons (because the computer fulfilled needs for
communication or social interaction), and activity reasons (to
fulfill their desired for hobbies or activities) [9]. The relevance of
the specific ICT to the older adult has also been demonstrated to
impact usage [15, 16].
1.2 Previous Research: Impacts on E-Service’s Usage
Previous research in the information systems literature has
suggested several factors that impact a user’s intention to use eservices. Based upon the theory of TAM, the Technology
Acceptance Model, these studies have demonstrated the
pervasiveness of the perceived ease of use and perceived
usefulness on user’s intentions to use e-services. Intention to use a
technology is thought to directly relate to an individual’s actual
use [1, 4]. Specific studies have sought to better understand the
antecedents of perceived ease of use and usefulness for e-services.
One potential antecedent to ease of use for e-services that has
been examined is perceived risk. Perceived risk includes feelings
of “uncertainty about possible negative consequences of using a
product or service” [7]. The incorporation of perceived risk into
the TAM model indicated that higher levels of perceived risk
decreased individual’s perceived ease of use of the e-service, and
therefore decreased their intention to use e-services [6, 7]. Others
have examined perceptions of trust in the e-service and
sponsoring organization [2]. Other research has suggested that
internet self-efficacy (an individual’s beliefs about how capable a
person is of completing a task using the internet) and e-service
self-efficacy (an individual’s belief about their competency of
completing an e-commerce transaction) impact individuals intent
to use e-services [10].
Most closely related to the study of older adults and e-services
was the study of the antecedents of perceived usefulness and ease
of use of an online e-government application (Central Provident
Fund), allowing older individuals to withdraw their social security
saving plan. Perceived usefulness was affected by older adults’
self-actualization (motivation to stay up to date on technological
skills) and resource saving (saving of time and money). Computer
anxiety and computer support available from others anteceded the
perceived ease of use of the e-service [13].
The studies previously discussed propose many factors thought to
impact older adult ICT usage and e-service usage by the general
public. These studies demonstrate a diversity of possible impacts
on older adult’s usage of e-services including: the ease of use and
relevance of the technology, user self-efficacy and technological
anxiety, perceived risk of the services, and user perceptions of
resource saving. However, it is not clear from the literature how
these factors are interrelated, or specific factors affecting older

adult usage. This abstract describes a mixed methods
methodology to further explore the factors that affect older adults’
e-services usage, and the relationships between these factors.
Because of the aging of our societies and the increased
development of e-services by government agencies, it will be
important to understand why some older adults choose to use
these services and others do not. Understanding these factors will
be important to ensure equal access for all members of our
societies.

6.

Featherman, M.S. and Fuller, M. 2003. Applying TAM
to e-services adoption: The moderating role of
perceived risk 36th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, 2003.

7.

Featherman, M.S. and Pavlou, P.A. 2003. Predicting eservices adoption: A perceived risk facets perspective.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 59
(2003). 451-474.

8.

Federal Election Commission. Help America Vote Act
of 2002: Public Law 107-252, 2002.

This poster proposes a multi-phase developmental mixed methods
design in order to understand why older adults use e-services less
than younger adults. Using previous literature and a set of
qualitative methods (semi-structured interviews and focus groups)
the researcher will seek to understand the various factors that
impact older adult e-service usage. Once these factors have been
discovered, the researcher plans to use a survey methodology to
understand which of these factors have the greatest impact on eservice usage and the relationship of these factors to one another
for the general population of older adults.

9.

Gietzelt, D. 2001. Computer and internet use among a
group of Sydney seniors: A pilot study. Australian
Academic & Research Libraries, 32 (2). 137-152.

10.

Hsu, M.-H. and Chiu, C.-M. 2004. Internet self-efficacy
and electronic service acceptance. Decision Support
Systems, 38 (2004). 369-381.

11.

Iyer, R. and Eastman, J.K. 2006. The elderly and their
attitudes toward the internet: The impact on internet
use, purchase, and comparison shopping. Journal of
Marketing Theory and Practice, 14 (1). 57-67.

12.

Lam, J.C.Y. and Lee, M.K.O. 2006. Digital
inclusiveness - Longitudinal study of internet adoption
by older adults. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 22 (4). 177-206.

13.

Phang, C.W., Sutanto, J., Kankanhalli, A., Li, Y., Tan,
b.C.Y. and Teo, H. 2006. Senior citizens' acceptance of
information systems: A study in the context of egovernment services. IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, 53 (4). 555-569.

14.

Roseman, G.H. and Stephenson, E.F. 2005. The effect
of voting technology on voter turnout: Do computers
scare the elderly? Public Choice, 123. 39-47.

15.

Selwyn, N. 2004. The information aged: A qualitative
study of older adults' use of information and
communications technology. Journal of Aging Studies,
18 (4). 369-384.

16.

Czaja, S.J., Charness, N., Fisk, A.D., Hertzog, C., Nair,
S.N., Rogers, W.A. and Sharit, J. 2001. Factors
predicting the use of technology: Findings from the
Center for Research and Education on Aging and
Technology Enhancement (CREATE). Psychology and
Aging, 21 (2). 333-352.

Tatnall, A. and Lepa, J. 2003. The internet, ecommerce, and older people: An actor network
approach to researching reasons for adoption and use.
Logistics and Information Management, 16 (1). 56-63.

17.

Davis, F.D. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease
of use, and user acceptance of information technology.
MIS Quarterly, 13 (3). 319-340.

U.S. Census Bureau. Facts for Features: Older
Americans Month Celebrated in May, 2005.DOI:
http://www.census.gov/PressRelease/www/releases/archives/facts_for_features_speci
al_editions/004210.html

18.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Medicare Modernization Update, 2003.DOI:
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MMAUpdate/

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4.2 [Computers and Society]: Social Issues – employment

General Terms
Human Factors

Keywords
Older adults, elderly, seniors, ICTs, e-services, governmental eservices.

1. REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Bagozzi, R.P. and Davis, F.D. 1992. Development and
test of a theory of technological learning and usage.
Human Relations, 45 (6). 659-686.
Carter, L. and Belanger, F. 2005. The utilization of egovernment services: Citizen trust, innovation and
acceptance factors. Information Systems Journal, 15. 525.

Eastman, J.K. and Iyer, R. 2004. The elderly’s uses and
attitudes towards the Internet. Journal of Consumer
Marketing, 21 (3). 208-220.

