Exploring Hidden Connections Among Historical Images
Wu Zheng
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
501 E. Daniel Street, MC-493, Champaign, IL 61820-6211

wuzheng2@illinois.edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper, an experiment is presented to explore
hidden connections among historical images using
literature-based discovery (LBD) method. The result
of the experiment shows that LBD has the potential in
finding implicit relations among these images.

Keywords
Literature Based Discovery, Information Retrieval

1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, more and more historical resources (old
documents, photos etc.) are digitized and made
available online together with metadata created by
librarians. In the description of the resources, usually
there is background information about the object, for
example, a short biography of a person, or the history
of an organization. Among historical images, there are
numerous implicit pairwise connections that cannot be
found using traditional keyword searches. Two
seemingly unrelated images, when put together, might
reveal some interesting patterns that were overlooked
before. The background information in the description
provides clues to these connections. An experiment
was conducted to explore the metadata of historical
images using literature-based discovery methods.
Several implicit relations among the images were
identified. The result of the experiment shows that
LBD can help users better navigate and use historical
image records.

2. INTRODUCTION TO
LITERATURE-BASED
DISCOVERY (LBD)
Literature-based discovery, first proposed by Swanson
(Swanson, 1986), is a method to systematically
explore implicit knowledge in literatures. Compared to
traditional information retrieval, LBD aim at
complementarities instead of similarities. Two
branches of LBD are widely studied in different fields:
one-node search and two-node search. In one-node
search, a specific topic is represented by a set of Aliterature that talks about it. The goal is to find another
(usually disjoint) set of C-literature that is relevant to
the topic. For example, A-literature can be a set of
articles that discusses a problem. In that case, Cliterature can be a set of papers that contains
information which might contribute to the solution of
the problem (Smalheiser & Torvik, 2008). In twonode search, concepts that connect two disjoint sets of
literature are sought.

Previous studies on LBD have shown that it is
effective in exposing “undiscovered public
knowledge” (Swanson, 1986). Several computerassisted
LBD
systems(Hristovski,
Friedman,
Rindflesch, & Peterlin, 2008; Smalheiser & Torvik,
2008; Srinivasan & Libbus, 2004; Yetisgen-Yildiz &
Pratt, 2006) have been developed in biomedical field
to help researchers generate hypothesis by analyzing
scientific literature. Cory (Cory, 1997) applied LBD
method on online humanities databases to discover
hidden analogies. Gordon et al (Gordon, Lindsay, &
Fan, 2002) extended the information sources of LBD
from scientific literatures to information available on
the World Wide Web. Luo et al (Luo, Tang, & Tian,
2007) developed a system that can answer
relationships queries by analyzing web information
based on the idea of LBD. Literature searches did not
find any study applying LBD method on images.

3. THE EXPERIMENT
3.1 Data
The data used for experiment was selected from the
Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS)
Digital Collection and Content (DCC) project
(http://imlsdcc.grainger.uiuc.edu/). The metadata
schema used in the project for resource description is
the
Dublin
Core
Metadata
Element
Set
(http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/). A single
collection,
the
King
County
Snapshots
(http://imlsdcc.grainger.uiuc.edu/collections/FullDispl
ay.asp?cid=2384), was chosen because of the high
quality metadata provided. This is a historical image
collection with more than 12,000 items portraying
people, places and events in the county.

3.2 Method
The experiment followed the one-node search method
mentioned above. The information source used to
explore the implicit connections is the title and
description field of the metadata associated with the
images. For a specific topic (person, place or event), a
set of A-records was retrieved using keyword
searches. The following steps were performed on each
A-record:
1.
2.

A-term identification. For each record,
the subject of the image (A-term) was
extracted from the title field.
B-term identification. The title and
description field of the record were
processed using the Stanford Named
Entity Recognizer

3.

(http://nlp.stanford.edu/ner/index.s
html). All the named entities (person,
organization and location names)
captured were potential B-terms that
connected the A-record with another
set of C-records. C-records contained
images that had implicit relations to the
topic represented by A-records.
Searching for C-records. New searches
were conducted for each B-term
identified. For each record retrieved, if
it was not in the set of A-records, and
the subject of the image in it was not
the B-term, the record was a C-record.
The image in an A-record had possible
implicit connection with the image in
C-record.

Figure 2: Juanita, Eleanor, and E. Martin Lewis,
Seattle, ca. 1930

Following the steps described above, numerous hidden
connections were identified. Some typical examples
are presented here.

Two photos titled “Ladies' Aid posing outside Grace
Presbyterian Church, Seattle, 1922” (Figure 1) and
“Juanita, Eleanor, and E. Martin Lewis, Seattle, ca.
1930” (Figure 2) were connected through “Grace
Presbyterian Church”. Ladies’ Aid was founded in
1912 for raising funds for the church. When the photo
was taken (1922), Eldred Martin Lewis was the
minister of the church. It appeared that Eldred
received financial support from the organization and
they might have other social connections. Juanita,
Eldred’s wife, was also a famous lady (there are a lot
of photos about her in this collection). It is possible
that Juanita also had connections with the organization
through her husband.

Ladies’ Aid/Grace Presbyterian Church/ Juanita,
Eleanor, and Eldred Martin Lewis

Anna Louise Strong / Industrial Workers of the World
(IWW)/John Henry Smith

Figure 1: Ladies' Aid posing outside Grace
Presbyterian Church, Seattle, 1922

Figure 3: Anna Louise Strong, possibly in Seattle,
1939

4.

Evaluation. Manual evaluations were
performed to ensure that the implicit
connections
identified
were
meaningful.

Further analyses were performed on the connections
identified.

3.3 Findings

Figure 4: John Henry Smith, Seattle, ca. 1921

Two photos titled “Anna Louise Strong, possibly in
Seattle, 1939” (Figure 3) and “John Henry Smith,
Seattle, ca. 1921” (Figure 4) were connected through
“IWW”. In the description of the first photo, it was
mentioned that Strong “was elected to the Seattle
School Board but later was recalled because of her
socialist politics and her support of the Industrial
Workers of the World”. On the other hand, John
“became active in I.W.W. circles about 1913”. Given
that both of them were living in Seattle at that time
and their support of the IWW, it is possible that there
were social connections between them.
George Frye/Henry Yesler/James Colman
Two photos titled “George Frederick Frye, Seattle, ca.
1888” (Figure 5) and “James Murray Colman, Seattle,
ca. 1885” (Figure 6) were connected through “Henry
Yesler”. In the description of the first photo, it is
mentioned that George Frye worked with Henry
Yesler at his mill from 1853. Later Frye established
his own hotel and became famous in the hotel
industry. James Colman, as described in the record,
operated Henry Frye’s mill from 1872. He established
a railway company later. Frye and Colman were
famous in different industries, but it is very likely that
they had some social connections through their
common (former) colleague Henry Yesler.

source for exploration. In this experiment, a large
proportion of the connections identified were social
connections among people and organization. This is
due to the coverage of the chosen collection (images
of people, places and events) and the NER used to
extract B-terms (identified person, organization and
location names). One possible application is to explore
the social networking among people covered in the
collection. Applying the method on a different
collection, across multiple collections or modifying
the NER to capture other types of entities might
identify other interesting connections. The method
used in the experiment relied on the human-assigned
metadata to explore the implicit connections, thus the
performance of the method would be influenced by the
quality of the metadata. For images with little or no
description, especially background information on the
subject, the connections are difficult to identified. The
evaluation of the connections is another important
issue. The relatedness in social science and humanities
is very subjective, and depends heavily on the
background and information need of the users. How to
automatically evaluate and rank the connections will
be focus of further research.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is grateful to Vetle Torvik and Qin Wei for
their review of this paper and the valuable
suggestions.

6. REFERENCES

Figure 5: George Frederick Frye, Seattle, ca. 1888

Figure 6: James Murray Colman, Seattle, ca. 1885

4. DISCUSSION
The large amount of connections identified in the
experiment indicated that LBD has the potential in
identifying implicit connections among images, and
the metadata associated with the images are possible

Cory, K. (1997). Discovering hidden analogies in an
online humanities database. Computers and
the Humanities, 31(1), 1-12.
Dublin Core Metadata Element Set. Retrieved
December
5,
2008,
from
http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/.
Gordon, M., Lindsay, R., & Fan, W. (2002).
Literature-based discovery on the World
Wide Web. ACM Transactions on Internet
Technology, 2(4), 261-275.
Hristovski, D., Friedman, C., Rindflesch, T., &
Peterlin, B. (2008). Literature-based
knowledge discovery using natural language
processing. In P. Bruza & M. Weeber (Eds.),
Literature-based Discovery (pp. 133-152):
Springer.
Institute of Museum and Library Services Digital
Collection
and
Content.
Retrieved
December
5,
2008,
from
http://imlsdcc.grainger.uiuc.edu/.
King county snapshots: a photographic heritage of
Seattle and surrounding communities.
Retrieved December 5, 2008, from
http://imlsdcc.grainger.uiuc.edu/collections/
FullDisplay.asp?cid=2384.
Luo, G., Tang, C., & Tian, Y. (2007). Answering
relationship queries on the web, 16th

International Conference on World Wide
Web (pp. 561 - 570).
Smalheiser, N., & Torvik, V. (2008). The place of
literature-based discovery in contemporary
scientific practice. In P. Bruza & M. Weeber
(Eds.), Literature-based Discovery (pp. 1322): Springer.
Srinivasan, P., & Libbus, B. (2004). Mining
MEDLINE for implicit links between
dietary
substances
and
diseases.
Bioinformatics, 20(Suppl. 1), i290-i296.

Stanford

Named Entity Recognizer. Retrieved
December
5,
2008
from
http://nlp.stanford.edu/ner/index.shtml.
Swanson, D. (1986). Undiscovered public knowledge.
The Library Quarterly, 56(22), 103-108.
Yetisgen-Yildiz, M., & Pratt, W. (2006). Using
statistical and knowledge-based approaches
for literature-based discovery. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, 39(6), 600-611.

