I-SCHOOLS AS A NATURAL HOME FOR
DIGITAL LIBRARIES EDUCATION
Barbara M. Wildemuth
Jeffrey Pomerantz
Sanghee Oh

Seungwon Yang
Edward A. Fox
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA USA
+1 540-231-5113

School of Information & Library Science
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC USA
+1 919-962-8366

<seungwon,fox>@vt.edu

<wildem,pomerantz,shoh>@email.unc.edu

ABSTRACT
Given that digital libraries bring together technology, information,
and the people using the information, it can easily be argued that
i-schools should play a central role in educating DL professionals.
This study examines the existing roles that i-schools play in DL
education from two different vantage points: their offering of DL
courses and their participation in a DL curriculum development
project. In addition, we explore the potential to expand the
iSchools Caucus by recruiting those schools that are active in DL
education efforts (i.e., those that offer courses or participate in
curriculum development) but are not yet members of the Caucus.
based on the seven course syllabi available on the open Web, DL
courses in the i-schools are further analyzed, in terms of the topics
covered, the textbooks used, and the types of assignments used.
From this analysis, we conclude that there is not yet a consensus
on the topics covered or the assignment used in DL courses.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.2 [Computing Milieux]: Computer and information science
education; H.3.7 [Information Systems]: Digital libraries

General Terms
Management

Keywords
i-schools, Digital libraries, Curriculum

1. INTRODUCTION
Both the federal government and individual institutions have
made significant investments in research and development related
to digital libraries (DLs) over the 15 years since the original
National Science Foundation funding of the Digital Library
Initiative [1]. Capitalizing on these investments, digital libraries
have become a standard part of many academic and research
organizations. However, the same investment has not been made
Poster presented at iConference 2009, Chapel Hill, NC,
February 8-11, 2009.

in the education of staff capable of building and managing DLs.
Given that digital libraries bring together technology, information,
and the people using the information, it can easily be argued that
i-schools should play a central role in educating DL professionals.

2. CURRENT I-SCHOOL INVOLVEMENT
IN DL EDUCATION
One way that i-schools might provide the education needed to
train DL professionals is to offer a full course (or two) related
specifically to digital libraries. Two prior studies of curricula in
information and library science (ILS) schools and computer
science (CS) departments identified 29 ILS schools and five CS
departments that offer such courses [3,4]; the results of this study
are updated here. There are now 39 schools offering DL courses.
Of the 21 i-schools participating in the iSchools Caucus [2], 10
were found to offer a digital libraries-related course: Drexel,
Florida State, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, North Carolina,
Pittsburgh, Rutgers, Syracuse, and Texas. From these data, we
can conclude that, if one considers CS departments, ILS schools,
and i-schools, it is among the i-schools that the probability is
highest that there will be a digital library course.
Another way to examine the involvement of the i-schools in
digital library education is through the lens of a particular
curriculum development project’s participants. Over the past three
years, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (a member
of the iSchools Caucus) and Virginia Tech have been involved in
a
collaborative
curriculum
development
project
(http://curric.dlib.vt.edu/) funded by the National Science
Foundation. 1 The project has expanded well beyond the borders
of those two universities, involving over 100 different scholars
and educators in developing or reviewing curriculum modules,
field testing those modules in their classes, or serving on the
project advisory board. Faculty from 11 of the 21 members of the
iSchools Caucus participated in some significant way in this
project. Those schools are: Carnegie Mellon, Drexel, Illinois,
Indiana, Maryland, North Carolina, Penn State, Rutgers,
Syracuse, UCLA, and Washington.
1

NSF grant IIS-0535060 was awarded to UNC-CH and grant IIS0535057 was awarded to Virginia Tech.

In addition to participating in this particular project, i-schools can
increase their offerings of DL-related instruction by incorporating
one or more DL-related modules in courses that make up their
respective degree programs. The recommended curriculum
framework articulated by the curriculum development project
(http://curric.dlib.vt.edu/DLcurric_images/ModuleFramework200
8-08-23.pdf) includes 10 areas, made up of a total of 46 modules.
Courses commonly taught at i-schools – on information
organization, collection development, information retrieval,
knowledge representation, metadata, preservation, or project
management, as well as digital libraries – could cover one or
more of the 14 modules already developed (or other modules
planned or recommended). There are currently 10 modules
(available at http://curric.dlib.vt.edu/modDev/modDev.html)
ready to use (i.e., they have already been reviewed and field
tested). They cover the history of DLs, digitization, metadata,
architecture, application software, information needs/relevance,
information seeking behaviors/ search strategies, interaction
design and usability assessment, reference services, and
evaluation/user studies. Typically, one or two class sessions will
suffice to cover a single module, so it should be relatively easy to
include a number of modules within the constraints of a one- or
two-year graduate degree program.

3. DL COURSES TAUGHT AT I-SCHOOLS
As noted above, 10 members of the iSchools Caucus offer a
course focused on digital libraries. Further investigation into these
courses was based on the seven syllabi that were available on the
open Web; these included syllabi from the courses at Drexel,
Indiana, North Carolina, Pittsburgh, Rutgers, Syracuse, and
Texas. We examined the topics covered, the textbook used and
the major assignments in each course.
The most common topics covered included: introduction to DLs,
DL history, metadata, architecture, interaction design and
usability, preservation, intellectual property, economics of DLs,
and the future of DLs. In general, these correspond to modules in
the curriculum framework referenced above. Topics not included
in the curriculum framework, but added by an individual
instructor, include: natural language processing, DL development
issues, professional competencies, the DL community, and
personal information management.
A half dozen different textbooks are used in these courses. They
include:
• Witten, I.H., & Bainbridge, D. (2003). How to Build a Digital
Library. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann. (used in 5 courses)
• Arms, W.Y. (2000). Digital Libraries. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. (used in 4 courses)
• Borgman, C.L. (2000). From Gutenberg to the Global
Information Infrastructure: Access to Information in the
Networked World. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (used in 4
courses)
• Lesk, M. (2005). Understanding Digital Libraries. (2nd
Edition) San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. (used in 3
courses)
A variety of activities are assigned in these courses. The two
assigned most frequently are 1) the review or evaluation of an
existing DL, and 2) the development of a DL. Both these types of

assignments appeared in almost every syllabus available for
analysis.

4. CONCLUSION
From the data reviewed here, we can conclude that the members
of the iSchools Caucus are actively involved in DL education.
Well over half the Caucus members either offer a course in digital
libraries or have faculty who are actively involved in curriculum
development in this area. While there still seems to be no clear
consensus on the content needed in DL courses (or the textbooks
or assignments used), continuing to learn from each other about
educational initiatives can only help improve the current situation.
Another conclusion one could draw from this analysis is that the
iSchools Caucus has an opportunity to expand its membership
among the other schools that offer courses in digital libraries or
are active in curriculum development efforts. This analysis
identified 32 schools that fit this description. They include:
Alabama, Alberta, British Columbia, Buffalo (SUNY), Catholic,
Clarion, Dalhousie, Denver, Dominican, Hawaii, Iowa, Kent
State, Louisiana State, Missouri, North Carolina Central, Old
Dominion, Pratt, Queens, San Jose State, Simmons, South
Carolina, South Florida, Southern Connecticut, Southern
Mississippi, Tennessee, Texas A&M, Valdosta State, Villanova,
Virginia Tech, Western Ontario, Wisconsin-Madison, and
Wisconsin-Milwaukee. If the iSchools Caucus is seeking new
members, these schools would be prime candidates.
We believe that i-schools should play an active role in developing
strong educational programs to educate digital library
professionals, and hope that i-schools not yet involved in the DL
curriculum development project will begin to participate. Indeed,
as the DL curriculum development project addresses
sustainability issues, we hope that the members of the iSchools
Caucus will step forward to integrate support of DL curricular
activities into their future plans, and will help to ensure that
digital library professionals will graduate in sufficient numbers
from some of the most innovative schools involved in this
important field.

REFERENCES
[1] Griffin, S.M. (1998, Jul/Aug). NSF/DARPA/NASA Digital
Libraries Initiative: A program manager’s perspective. D-Lib
Magazine, 4. http://www.dlib.org/dlib/july98/07griffin.html.
[2] iSchools Caucus. (2008). Who are the iSchools? Retrieved
November 24, 2008, from
http://www.ischools.org/oc/schools.html.
[3] Pomerantz, J., Oh, S., Wildemuth, B.M., Yang, S., & Fox,
E.A. (2007). Digital library education in computer science
programs. Short paper presented at the Joint Conference on
Digital Libraries, Vancouver, June 20-23, 2007.
http://eprints.cs.vt.edu/archive/00000945/01/Pomerantz_CSs
yllabi.pdf.
[4] Pomerantz, J., Oh, S., Yang, S., Fox, E.A., & Wildemuth,
B.M. (2006). The core: Digital library education in library
and information science programs. D-Lib Magazine, 12(11).
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/november06/pomerantz/11pomerant
z.html.

