ICTs For Synergy: A Case Study Of Scientific Knowledge And Local Farmers’
Innovative Activities In Ghana
Benjamin Kwasi Addom
Doctoral Candidate
Syracuse University School of Information Studies
SYNOPSIS
The proposed study aims at understanding the existing media and contents of
communication between and among local farmers (LF), agricultural extension officers
(AEO) and agricultural researchers (AR) and their implications on the advent of the new
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) for agricultural development in
Ghana. While the study recognizes the transformative power of the new digital network
and its applications in openly disseminating scientific knowledge (Stiglitz, 1999) from
one location to another, it also argues that without an intelligent approach to unearthing
the innovative activities and local experiences of the communities, the impact of the
information age on these economies will remain nebulous. With underlying concepts
from the literature on knowledge management (scientific and local knowledge) and the
theory of absorptive capacity, the study uses a mixed method approach to analyze the
current communication processes and explore new avenues for future improvement. It
employs the use of survey, interviews and focus group discussions to elicit data from the
three groups at two selected agricultural districts of Ghana where there is a strong linkage
between research, extension, and farming. The result of the study is expected to have
theoretical, practical and policy implications on knowledge sharing among the actors.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
The importance of knowledge generation in any agricultural innovation system
cannot be overemphasized. This becomes more critical in the case of Ghana considering
the declining statistics on productivity despite national and international efforts and
initiatives. In the wake of this, agricultural research, extension and development have
progressed in Ghana through the Transfer of Technology (ToT) model from the colonial
period through Training and Visit (T&V) model of the World Bank that emerged in
response to the inefficiencies in the ToT system, to the current program of Farmer Field
Schools (FFS). Several studies in the area reveal that the emphasis is being shifted onto
sharing of knowledge between technical experts and local people (Coldevin, 2003)
instead of the conventional approach of ‘knowledge transfer’. This is being recognized
considering the special characteristics of the new ICTs to take knowledge generated from
one location to another (Stiglitz, 1999; Colle and Roman, 2003). At the same time,
skeptics such as Sevigny and Prevost (2006) see ICTs as accelerating the dissemination
of information but not knowledge, a view that goes to support arguments made by
Polanyi (1966) and Szulanski (2003) on the nature of knowledge which makes tacit
knowledge very difficult to transfer. It will therefore be interesting to explore how these
technologies can help in sharing farmers local knowledge which is embedded in their
day-to-day activities and experiences.
On the other hand, every succesful innovation system involves a continuous
exchange of knowledge for ideas to be turned into processes or products. Considering the
important role agriculture plays in Ghanas' economy (Dzidonu, 2002), it is critical to
1

understand and analyze knowledge flow within the national agricultural innovation
system, comprising mainly of farmers, researchers and extension workers. While science
and technology (scientific knowledge) has heavily influenced the country’s agricultural
production system for decades, there is also a huge body of literature on the value of
farmers’ local knowledge and innovations in agriculture (Amanor, 1994).
Taking into account the rich professional and scientific work that has been going
on in these three areas - i) scientific knowledge in agricultural production (content); ii)
local knowledge and farmer innovations (content), and iii) ICTs for development
(media), one would have expected a synergy for employing ICTs to tap farmers’ local
knowledge and innovative activities back into scientific research. Empirically, however,
little is known (if any) of how access to ICTs by agricultural researchers and extension
officers is use to unearth the existing knowledge and innovative activities of local
farmers.
This dissertation research argues that, for a stable agricultural innovation system
in Ghana, agricultural scientists need to reconsider ways by which farmers’ local
knowledge and innovative activities can be incorporated into scientific research for
further innovations.
GOAL
The main goal of this research is to explore with the three stakeholders, the role of
the new ICTs, and how these technologies can facilitate the functions of agricultural
research and extension.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
RQ1: What is the current state (media and contents) of communication between and
among local farmers, agricultural extension officers, and agricultural researchers in
Ghana?
RQ2: What is the role of the new ICTs and how can these tools help in identifying,
documenting, and acquiring farmers’ local innovations by extension officers and
researchers?
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The study draws and builds upon knowledge from the following interrelated
concepts and fields;
a) The significant contribution of scientific knowledge and innovations to
agriculture (Agrawal, 1995; Andersen, 2007) through transfer of technology model
(Rogers, 1962); training and visit model (Tanaka, 2007); and the current farmer field
school model (Simpson and Owen, 2002) cannot be ignored.
b) At the same time, the value of farmers’ local knowledge and innovations in
agriculture in developing nations (Ghana inclusive) (Amanor, 1994; Bentley, 1992;
Sperling et al., 1993; Amanor, 1994; Kamangira, 1997; Bellon, 2001) has been
extensively documented.
c) The unique characteristics of the new ICTs as invaluable resources for
agricultural research (ISNAR, 2003), and the driver of knowledge and information
society (Okpaku, 2003; Dahlman and Aubert, 2002; OECD, 2001; Stern and Furman,

2

2000) has also been argued. Colle and Roman (2003) stated that ICTs are uniquely useful
for reaching many people simultaneously and overcoming geographic boundaries and
capturing the reality of events.
d) But for synergy between scientific knowledge and local knowledge and
innovations of farmers, there should be a willingness of the scientists to incorporate
farmers’ local innovations into their research activities and also for the local farmers to be
willing to share their experiences with the scientists. The process of identifying,
documenting, and incorporating farmers’ local innovations into scientific research draws
on the underlying theory for the study. This idea takes it root from the theory of
absorptive capacity - the capability of any system to acquire, assimilate and exploit
external knowledge makes the system innovative and competitive. Zahra and George
(2002) reconceptualized to include the potential (acquire and assimilate) and realized
(transform and exploit) absorptive capacity. The theory has been successfully explored in
the for-profit sector such as in firms (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Zahra and George,
2002); inter-firm collaborations (Stuart, 1998); and within nations (Liu and White, 1997).
This study therefore explores the theory under a not-for-profit organizations - research
institutes but also limits its scope to only the potential absorptive capacity.
METHODOLOGY
The study is designed as an analytical multi-case study aimed at using a
sequential mixed-method approach of survey (quantitative); and in-depth interview and
focus group discussion (qualitative) for data collection. Two cases will be selected by
replication logic (Yin, 1994) and each of the two sites (or cases) will be considered as an
experiment in itself. Result from the subsequent site is expected to confirm findings from
the first or yield similar results (literal replication) (Eisenhardt, 1989).
Two sites in the country have met the three basic requirements for gathering the
appropriate data for the study – i) presence of agricultural research institute, ii) history of
agricultural extension work, and iii) extensive farming activities. The first case is located
at the southern sector of the country while the second case at the northern sector. Both
cases have a long history of collaborative work between research, extension and smallscale farming. The full research process will be conducted at the first site and then
repeated at the second site. The process begins with a descriptive approach to understand
the current communication system among and between the three groups of actors, and
then analytically interpret the situation for use in the second phase. A survey technique
for data collection at this stage is mainly designed for researchers and extension officers.
The second phase will use exploratory approach to find ways by which the new ICTs can
be effectively and efficiently deployed into the system.
The results from the survey will be used to design the instrument for the in-depth
interview, and the result from the interview will be used to design the instrument for the
focus group discussion. The idea behind the focus group method is that group processes
can help people to explore and clarify their views in ways that would be less easily
accessible in a one-to-one interview (Kitzinger, 1994). The approach also does not
discriminate against people who cannot read or write and can encourage participation
from people reluctant to be interviewed on their own (Kitzinger, 1994). Focus group

3

discussion is also useful in explaining or exploring survey results (O’Brien, 1993). The
second phase will be fully explored among the three actors.
The design as employed in the first case will then be repeated in the second case
with minor changes to the instruments depending on the situation on the ground.
SIGNIFICANCE AND EXPECTED IMPACT
A number of gaps have been identified in the literature as mentioned above, and
the results of this study will significantly contribute to bridging these gaps. This include
i) strengthening the basic assumption by most development initiatives that by using ICTs,
poor communities in Africa can contribute more efficiently to their own development; ii)
increasing the efficiency of agricultural production, processing, storage and marketing
mechanisms; iii) theoretically, resulting in the extension of the theory of absorptive
capacity that has been explored in several other situations such as in firms; inter-firms;
and within nations; iv) increase a sense of ownership, empowerment, and help promote
and integrate local knowledge sharing habits; v) enhance farmers’ welfare; increase job
efficiency for scientists; and increase food production for society.
Key Words: Scientific Knowledge; Local Knowledge and Innovation; Open Innovation;
Information Communication Technologies; and Agriculture Development
REFERENCES
Agrawal, A. (1995). Indigenous and scientific knowledge: some critical comments, IK
Monitor 3(3)
Ahuja, G. and Katila, R. (2001). Technological acquisitions and the innovation
performance of acquiring firms: A longitudinal study. Strategic Management
Journal, 197-220.
Amanor, K. S. (1994). Ecological knowledge and the regional economy: environmental
management in the Asesewa district of Ghana. Development and Change 25(1):
4167.
Bellon, M. R. (2001). Participatory Research Methods for Technology Evaluation: A
Manual for Scientists Working with Farmers. Mexico, D.F.: CIMMYT.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). Open Innovation: the new imperative for creating and profiting
from technology, Harvard Business School Press
Chesbrough, H., Vanhaverbeke, W. and West, J., (eds.) (2006). Open Innovation:
Researching a New Paradigm, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Cohen, W. M. and Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on
Learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly. 35: 128-152
Coldevin, G. (2003). Participatory Communication: a Key to Rural Learning Systems.
Sustainable Development Department, FAO SD Dimensions
http://www.fao.org/docrep/005/y4774e/y4774e06.htm#TopOfPage
Farrington, J. and Martin, A. M. (1988). Farmer Participation in Agricultural Research: A
Review or Concepts and Practices, Agricultural Administration Unit Occasional
Paper 9, Overseas Development Institute, London.

4

Gilgun, J. F. (1994). A case for case studies in social work research. Social Work, 4,
371–380.
Haverkort, B. and de Zeeuw, H. (1992). Development of Technologies towards
Sustainable Agriculture: Institutional Implications. pp.231-242, In W.M. Rivera
and D.J. Gustafson (Eds.), Agricultural Extension: Worldwide Institutional
Evolution and Forces for Change. New York: Elsevier Science Publishing Company.
Kamangira, J. B. (1997). Assessment of soil fertility status using conventional and
participatory methods. MSc. thesis, Department of Crop Science, Bunda College of
Agriculture, University of Malawi. 107 pp
Keller, W. (1996). Absorptive capacity: On the creation and acquisition of technology in
Development. Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 49, 199-227
Liu, X. and White, R. S. (1997). The relative contributions of foreign technology and
domestic inputs to innovation in Chinese manufacturing industries Technovation,
17(3), 119-125
Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge creating company: How Japanese
companies create the dynamics of innovation. London: Oxford University Press.
Norgaard, R. B. (1984). Traditional Agricultural Knowledge: Past Performance,
Future Prospects, and Institutional Implications." American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 66:874-878.
Stiglitz, J. (1999). Scan Globally, Reinvent Locally: Knowledge Infrastructure and the
Localization of Knowledge, A Keynote Address given at the first Global
Development Network Conference, Germany
Stuart, T. E. (1998). Network positions and propensities to collaborate: An investigation
of strategic alliance formation in a high-technology industry. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 43: 668-698.
Tashakkori, A. and Teddlie, C. (2003). Handbook of Mixed Methods in Social and
Behavioral Research, Sage, Thousand Oaks.
Yin, R. K. (1984). Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage Publications,
Beverly Hills, California.
Yin, R. (2003). Case Study Research, 3rd ed. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA
Zahra, S. A. and George, G. (2002). Absorptive capacity: a review and
Re-conceptualization, and extension. Academy of Management Review 27 (2),
185-203.

5

