Image-Enabled Discourse:
A Preliminary Descriptive Investigation
Jaime Snyder
School of Information Studies,
Syracuse University
221 Hinds Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244

jasnyd01@syr.edu
ABSTRACT
This poster presents preliminary results of an exploratory
qualitative research. The hypothesis of this study is that
affordances provided by image-enabled communication practices
(i.e. drawing) create salient or hospitable conditions for reaching
specific conversation outcomes. Qualitative empirical research in
the form of semi-structured interviews seeks to establish a starting
point for more robust future investigations of image-enabled
communicative practices.

individuals. Ad hoc visualizations can anchor, bridge, and
facilitate the flow of information at crucial moments in a
conversation.
Rarely seen as aesthetic objects of great admiration for their
own sake, these information artifacts answer to a different set of
requirements than other constructed images (such as art). Imageenabled discourse is the term used here to refer to the
phenomenon of creating and using visual information during
communicative acts.

Keywords

2. RESEARCH QUESTIONS

Image-enabled discourse, ad hoc visualization, creation and use of
visual information, multimodal communication.

1. PROBLEM STATEMENT
We might tend to think of words as being the primary
building blocks from which we construct conversations. However,
a number of other tactics are available to us when we try to
communicate with others. We can gesture, growl or make a face.
We also have an ability to exchange meaning through the use of
images. Due to their ability to communicate across a range of
contexts, images and visual information are playing an
increasingly important role in how we work and collaborate with
each other in both face-to-face and virtual environments. Images
are ubiquitous in our daily communications. However, the various
nascent areas of image-centered research are only beginning to
coalesce around integrated and accepted concepts regarding the
role images play in communication practice and culture.
The exploratory research presented here focuses on a
particular type of spontaneously created image, illustrated by socalled “napkin drawings.” This ubiquitous form of ad hoc
visualization consists of marks made on an available surface
during the flow of a conversation, sometimes kept, sometimes
abandoned, and notoriously cryptic for those not involved in the
discussion. These drawings often coincide with moments of great
insight or collaborative idea generation, and thus are clearly an
important component in the process of communication between

The hypothesis of this study is that affordances provided by
image-enabled communication practices (i.e. drawing) create
salient or hospitable conditions for reaching specific conversation
outcomes. The exploratory research described here seeks to
answer the following questions:
1. Why do people start drawing during predominately
verbal conversations?
2. How do image-enabled communicative practices
support exchange of meaning?
3. Which affordances of visual modes of communication
are most salient to image-enabled discourse strategies?
To address these questions, semi-structured interviews,
conducted both face-to-face and online, were conducted.
Narratives describing conversations where drawing occurred
during the course of the exchange were analyzed to identify types
of ad hoc visualization practices and corresponding conditions,
affordances and outcomes.
The goal of this exploratory qualitative study is to generate a
preliminary descriptive model of image-enabled discourse based
on empirical data. This model will seek to address how specific
image-enabled discourse strategies create salient conditions that
help people reach desired communication goals.

3. DEFINITIONS
Image-enabled discourse is used here to refer to any
interaction (face-to-face or virtual) between individuals that relies
at some point on the interjection of an image in order to meet the
goals of the exchange. The preliminary study focuses on a
particular type of image-centered discourse in which drawing is
the image-based communicative practice employed and where
two individuals are involved in face-to-face conversation.
This phenomenon is inherently dynamic and bi-directional;
each participant may have unique and evolving goals throughout
the course of the exchange, and therefore, the creation of ad hoc

image may serve different purposes as the conversation
progresses. For this study, respondents were asked to focus on a
specific conversation in which drawing took place, and described
the beginning and end of this specific conversational. Therefore,
the boundaries and outcomes of each episode are determined
based on these self-reported details.
This highlights a temporal component to the model that is
key to understanding drawing as a communicative practice akin to
an utterance. The ad hoc nature of the act of creating visual
information during an exchange is an important aspect of the
contribution images make to collaborative interactions. The notion
of co-occurrence of multiple modes of communication (or
simultaneous semiotic systems) is supported by research in the
area of multimodal discourse analysis and is aligned with some
research in multilingual communication (Auer, 1998; Gumperz,
1982; Kress & Leeuwen, 2001; Myers-Scotton, 1993). The
dynamic and spontaneous nature of the phenomenon also makes it
challenging to study in a controlled way.
This research also incorporates the concept of affordances
applied to multimodal communicative practices. In this context,
the term refers to those aspects of ad hoc visual communication
(specifically mark-making) that are uniquely suited to providing
the conditions needed to employ certain communicative practices.
For example, drawing is by nature persistent, tangible and visible.
These are examples of affordances of drawing (as opposed to
utterances or gestures) (Gibson, 1986; Norman, 1999)).

4. METHOD
Semi-structured interviews were conducted, evoking rich
descriptions of face-to-face conversations that included the
creation of one or more drawings. Respondents were asked to
describe face-to-face conversations they have participated in that
included the creation of one or more drawings. The goal of semistructured interviews was to gather rich, systematic descriptions
from participants in order to begin to isolate patterns of
communicative practices, salient conditions, enabling affordances
and interaction outcomes.
An initial pilot study involved eleven face-to-face interviews.
A follow-up study expanded this library of narratives by
administering a very similar protocol via an online questionnaire.
Forty usable responses were gathered in October 2008. The webbased interview protocol was delivered via Ultimate Survey and
online participants were recruited through the Study Response
Project (http://studyresponse.syr.edu/). Because this study
sought to gather information about image-enabled exchanges at a
basic interaction level, characteristics of the sample were broad:
adults over the age of 18.
Two research techniques commonly used in information
science research were selected to guide the design of semistructured interview questions: critical incident technique (CIT)
(Flanagan, 1954) and sense-making methodology (Dervin, 1999).
Like CIT, sense-making seeks to situate respondents in a specific
moment related to a phenomenon of interest. Respondents were
asked to think of a specific face-to-face conversation involving
one or two other people when a drawing was created during the
course of the conversation. The respondent could have been the
one drawing and/or a conversation partner could have drawn.
Preliminary investigations revealed that the influence of a
specific teaching technique or institutionalized practice might
cloud descriptions of the more incremental interactions taking
place. As such, the focus on one-on-one interactions was

motivated by a desire to avoid descriptions of classroom teaching
where drawings were used.
Although there are certainly drawbacks to the online format,
these were offset by the greater number of responses gathered,
beneficial at this early stage of the research. Overall, although the
face-to-face interviews provided far richer data, the online
responses were detailed enough to corroborate and extend a
preliminary scheme identifying image-enabled communicative
practices related to the use of ad hoc visualizations.

5. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Inductive content analysis, guided by the semi-structured
nature of the protocols, was conducted on both the face-to-face
and online responses. Responses yielded consistently rich
information about the conditions and outcomes surrounding the
creation and use of drawing in conversations. Narratives were
analyzed with four general concepts in mind:
•
Hospitable or salient conditions that seemed to
contribute to the effectiveness of the communicative
practice
•
Enabling affordances of drawing that helped to establish
those conditions
•
Overall interaction outcomes
Together these elements contributed to the identification of a
preliminary scheme for analyzing image-enabled interactions
(Table 1).
From the data emerged a pattern of conversational practices
that relies heavily on the use of drawing to establish conditions
that enable respondents to achieve goals or contributes
substantially to reaching certain goals. When recounting the
details of their conversations, respondents tended to equate
conversational episodes with a single communication outcome.
Therefore, conversation outcomes are the anchor for this scheme.
The outcomes listed represent dominant categories identifiable
even in the coarsely grained data collected to date. However, it
should be noted that other classifications are not mutually
exclusive, as indicated by the cross-listing of conditions and
affordances.
On a certain level, we exhibit great expertise at deploying
images just when we need them. Bringing this ability into a more
conscious and deliberate domain will allow us to better exploit
this seemingly innate human communication practice when
building systems. Insight provided by a functional understanding
of the role of images within conversation has great potential to
enhance traditional information models by incorporating notions
of context and functionality into the overall meaning of an image.

6. FUTURE RESEARCH
Preliminary analysis has revealed an interesting set of
identifiable categories of image-enabled practices. During future
phases of this research, increasingly robust methods, such as
experimental protocols, will be developed to further validate these
patterns of image-enabled communication practices.

Table 1. Initial scheme for analyzing image-enabled interactions
Interaction outcome

Consensus

Types of communicative
practices

Salient conditions

Enabling affordances

Drawing enables the use of these
communicative practices:

Ad hoc visualizations provide the ability
to:

Drawings helped provide these
conditions because of these attributes:

Normalize representation of a
concept

Establish common points of
reference

Plastic
Mutually Accessible
Symbolic

Aggregate and synchronize input
from multiple sources
Build isomorphic bridges between
knowledge domains
Persuasion

Re-focus the attention of others to
more closely align with a specific
ideal

Independently amplify or diminish
parts of a representation
Perceive information as accurate,
complete and without bias

Plastic
Mutually Accessible
Symbolic
Authoritative

Verification

Change the form of the message
in order to verify understanding

Accurately translate a representation
into another language or mode

Mutually Accessible
Symbolic
Visual

Visualization

Convey specific information in a
mode as close to its original
expression as possible

Perceive information as accurate,
complete and without bias

Plastic
Mutually Accessible
Symbolic
Visual

Allow information to retain its
context
Synchronize

Create a waypoint, or moment of
synchronized understanding,
before moving forward

Establish common points of
reference

Mutually Accessible
Symbolic

Aggregate and synchronize input
from multiple sources
Build isomorphic bridges between
knowledge domains
Map similar but not necessarily
identical concepts

7. REFERENCES
Auer, P. (1998). Code-Switching in Conversation: Language,
Interaction and Identity: Routledge.
Dervin, B. (1999). On studying information seeking
methodologically: the implications of connecting
metatheory to method. Information Processing and
Management, 35(6), 727-750.
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The Critical Incident Technique.
Psychological Bulletin, 51(4), 327-358.

Gibson, J. J. (1986). The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982). Discourse Strategies: Cambridge
University Press.
Kress, G., & Leeuwen, T. V. (2001). Multimodal Discourse: The
Modes and Media of Contemporary Communication:
Arnold.
Myers-Scotton, C. (1993). Social Motivations for
Codeswitching: Evidence from Africa: Clarendon Pr.
Norman, D. A. (1999). Affordance, conventions, and design.
interactions, 6(3), 38-41.

