Institutional and Organizational Influences on the Design
of Integrated Criminal Justice Information Systems
Michael Tyworth
The Pennsylvania State University
329B IST Building
mtyworth@ist.psu.edu

ABSTRACT
In this paper I present preliminary findings from research on the
design and use of interorganizational information systems being
developed to facilitate information sharing among criminal justice
agencies, called IJIS. One, institutionalized practices, values, and
norms remain a barrier to effective integration, collaboration and
information sharing. Two, individual IJIS have unique identities
that are reflected in both their organizational and technological
arrangements.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.43 [Computers and Society]: Organizational Impacts –
automation, computer-supported collaborative work, employment,
reengineering.

General Terms
Management, Design

2. INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE:
INTEGRATED CRIMINAL JUSTICE
INFORMATION SYSTEMS (IJIS)
In 1991 Congress set a goal of a National Information
Infrastructure comprised of seamless public and private
communication networks, interactive services, and interoperable
hardware, software, databases, and ICT devices [7]. Though they
predate the establishment of the NII, IJIS are an excellent
example of the attempts to put the concept of an NII into practice.
IJIS are complex organizational and technological ensembles
created to integrated heterogeneous information systems in law
enforcement [6]. The development of an IJIS includes integration
of organizational processes, information stores, and technical
infrastructures to some degree. IJIS initiatives occur at all levels
of government but the most prominent reside at the local/regional
level and the state level of government [4].

2.1 ARJIS& JNET
Keywords
Organizational identity, integrated criminal justice information
systems, design practices

1. INTRODUCTION
Through this paper I present findings on the design of integrated
criminal justice information systems (IJIS). Complex
technological and organizational ensembles, IJIS are being
developed at all levels of government in an attempt to provide
greater integration, collaboration, and sharing of information
among criminal justice agencies. A comparative case study of
two preeminent IJIS leads to two findings. One, institutionalized
practices, values, and regulations remain a major barrier to
effective integration, collaboration and sharing of information
among criminal justice agencies. Two, individual IJIS have
distinct identities that are reflected in both their organizational
practices and arrangements of their ICT artifacts. Combined,
these findings present a picture where comprehensive integration
at a national level – providing a national criminal justice
information infrastructure – is unlikely to be achievable in the
foreseeable future.

Two exemplar IJIS currently in operation are the Automated
Regional Justice Information System1 (ARJIS) serving San Diego
County in California, and the Pennsylvania Justice Network2
(JNET) which serves the entire Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ARJIS is an IJIS created around a legacy mainframe database of
the same name. Organizationally, ARJIS is governed by ten
member agencies and the ARJIS management organization.
Technologically, ARJIS has integrated ten separate local and state
criminal justice information systems along with the federal
systems such as the National Crime Information Center (NCIC).
Over 11,000 users access ARJIS regular using mobile data
terminals, desktop workstations, and handheld devices.
JNET was established as an organization within Pennsylvania’s
Office of Administration by executive order in 1995. JNET
resides within the Executive Branch of the commonwealth
government and its strategic-level governance is provided by a
steering committee comprised of state level agencies. Operation
and design of JNET is managed by the JNET organization itself
headed by an executive director. JNET provides access to over
twenty individual state and federal systems. The majority of
these systems are criminal justice information systems; however
JNET also provides access to transportation, transportation, public
welfare, and other tangentially related systems. Currently, JNET
1

See http://www.arjis.org/

2

See
http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt?open=512&objID
=1189&mode=2

provides access to over 30,000 users in all 67 counties in
Pennsylvania.

3. INSTITUTIONAL BARRIERS INHIBIT
INTEGRATION
Law enforcement in the United States is institutionally
disintegrated and entrenched institutional practices remain a
major barrier to comprehensive integration at a national level.
There are over 19,000 police agencies in the United States [3].
Each of these agencies has its own leadership, management
structure, norms, rules and regulations, missions, and ICT
infrastructures. Myopia regarding information assets is highly
prevalent among law enforcement agencies in terms of design,
ownership, and access to information resources [5]. As a result,
even successful IJIS efforts like ARJIS and JNET have to work
around these institutional barriers in order to gain access.
This need to work around barriers to integration is especially
prevalent at JNET where designers and managers are attempting
to integrate not only law enforcement systems but systems from
other governmental domains. Partly as a response to these
institutionalized barriers to integration, JNET designers act as a
central hub to the individual systems rather than as an integrator
of them. JNET users access each system individually, one-at a
time. If a user wishes follow-up a query of the Pennsylvania State
Police’s (PSP) CLEAN system with a query of the Department of
Transportation’s (DOT) license photo database, they have to run
two separate queries.
This is because early in JNET’s
development JNET had to approach these agencies individually
and sequentially in order to get them to participate. JNET had to
establish trust with each by allowing each to retain maximum
control over their assets.
Table 1. Institutional Barriers to Integration
Institutional
Barrier

ARJIS

JNET

Data myopia –
highly
institutionalized
norm among
participating
agencies of
“protecting”
individual data
assets

Individual agencies
retain ownership of
data, but must
conform to IJIS
standards to attach
to system.

Brokerage
architecture where
JNET acts as a
connectivity bridge
among disparate
information sources

Regulatory barriers
inhibit information
sharing across
regional / state
borders

ARJIS development
efforts hampered by
requirement of state
approval for all new
systems attaching to
state connected
databases

JNET has had
difficulty expanding
connectivity to
regional systems
because of state
information sharing
prohibitions.

Though ARJIS managers and designers faced lower institutional
barriers to sharing they still were forced to allow member
agencies to retain a large amount of autonomy in regards to their

ICT. Individual member agencies are free to develop their own
ICT infrastructures independent of ARJIS or any other ARJIS
member agency. Individual agencies still retain control over their
data and public use of agency data must be approved by the
agency that owns it. As with JNET ARJIS takes this approach in
order to maintain participation. Though interested in sharing
information, agencies want to be able to pursue their own ICT
agendas.
Institutional barriers exist outside the IJIS as well. For example,
because ARJIS connects to a state law enforcement database, all
new connections to the system – either new connection points or
new systems – must be approved by the state. This burden adds
to the difficulty of integrating new systems into ARJIS.
JNET has experienced obstacles to integrating with systems in
bordering states due to legal restrictions on the use of criminal
justice data in Pennsylvania. As a result, JNET’s ability to
integrate across state borders has been greatly hampered.
Institutional barriers are one reason why national-scale integration
remains supremely difficult; how the IJIS organizations perceive
themselves is another.

4. ORGANIZATIONAL IDENTITY
SHAPES IJIS ORGANIZATIONAL AND
TECHNOLOGICAL DESIGN OF IJIS
Organizational identity is a concept with roots in the scholarship
and literature on management and organizations.
An
organization’s identity is what is collectively perceived by its
members as the organization’s central, enduring, and unique
features [8]. Just as with individual identity, organizational
identity serves to not only define for the organization who the
organization is, but who it is not; or, in other words, how the
organization is different from other organizations [1, 2]. An
organization’s identity serves as a guide to organizational action,
and through shaping the organization’s culture, shapes its
artifacts.
The organizational identities of ARJIS and JNET differ, and these
differences are reflected in the designs of their organizational
ICT. ARJIS’ organizational identity is that of a regional center
for collaboration and technology for the purposes of serving law
enforcement. This identity is reflected in the ARJIS system in
three important ways. One all additions or modifications to the
features and functionality of the ARJIS system are collectively
negotiated by the ARJIS member agencies. Two, every design
decision is guided by an overarching criterion: will the change be
beneficial to law enforcement?
Three, member agencies
contribute their data to the ARJIS mainframe in exchange for
access to the ARJIS system and data definitions, standards, and
integrity are collaboratively negotiated and maintained.
JNET’s identity is that of a broker of criminal justice information
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Like ARJIS JNET’s
identity is reflected in its organizational ICT. Instead of
collaborating among member agencies to design the overall
system, JNET partners with specific agencies to provide the
connectivity they need. JNET as an organization is not interested
in retaining data, but rather JNET is interested in acting as a

mediating access point between different agencies – as reflected
in its hub-and-spoke architecture3 discussed previously.
Table 2. Influences of Identity on IJIS Design
IJIS
ARJIS

Identity
Attributes
Identity of regional
center for
technology and
collaboration
serving law
enforcement

Impact on Design
System design is
collectively
negotiated
All design decisions
are evaluated
against benefit to
law enforcement
Data definitions and
standards are
collaboratively
determined and
maintained
Data is stored
centrally in
mainframe database

JNET

Broker of criminal
justice information
for the
Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania

Input on design of
new system features
and forms of access
limited to individual
agencies providing
connectivity.
JNET does not own
or store data but
provides access
Needs of
Commonwealth
agency (or
government) take
precedence in design
decision hierarchy

Similarly, JNET’s identity as a state government agency results in
a design prioritization of Commonwealth needs. When selecting
which features to add, what hardware and software to employ,
what vendors to contract with, JNET’s identity as a state agency
plays a decisive role. Priority is given to system features
identified by commonwealth partnering agencies, the legislature,
or the governor’s office as being critical. Local agency needs,
from whom the majority of JNET’s user base is derived, are
relegated to bug fixes and minor updates requested through the
help desk.
3

In many ways the JNET portal acts like the roundhouse found in
rail yards of history. Just as a locomotive would enter the
roundhouse and be routed out in the direction it needed to go; a
user virtually enters the JNET portal and is routed to the desired
back-end system.

5. CONCLUSION
So, given that institutional barriers and organizational identities
shape individual IJIS efforts, what does this mean for national
efforts to integrated law enforcement ICT as part of a broader
information infrastructure policy? Most importantly it means that
total national integration is unlikely given the varying needs at
different levels of government. Instead, collectives, brokers, and
mediated access will likely be the basis for sharing. Two, it
means that short of a significant institutional overhaul – such as
nationalizing police – national integration is likely to remain at
best, a goal just out of reach for the foreseeable future. Local
identities, institutional structures, norms and the reality that crime
is primarily a local problem to be solved, are likely to prevent
systematic integration are likely to limit the ability to integrate to
regional levels. Policymakers should continue to push integration
and standardization however, with time enough homogeneity in
systems development will make a greater level of integration
much easier to achieve.

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank my adviser, Dr. Steve Sawyer, for his
guidance and assistance in conducting this research. Also thank
you to the members of the ARJIS and JNET management teams
who provided their time and access. This research was funded in
part by National Science Foundation grants IIS-05-0742687 and
IIS-05-34889.

7. REFERENCES
[1]
Albert, S., Ashforth, B.E. and Dutton, J.E.
Organizational identity and identification: Charting new waters
and building new bridges. Academy of Management. The
Academy of Management Review, 25 (1). 13-17.
[2]
Ashforth, B.E. and Mael, F. Social Identity Theory And
The Organization. The Academy of Management Review, 14 (1).
20-39.
[3]
Bureau of Justice Statistics. Census of State and Local
Law Enforcement Agencies (CSLLEA), 2000. U.S. Department
of Justice Office of Justice Programs ed., 2000.
[4]
Gil-Garcia, J.R., Schneider, C.A. and Pardo, T.A.
Effective Strategies in Justice Information Integration: A Brief
Current Practices Review Center for Technology in Government,
Albany, NY, 2004.
[5]
Manning, P.K. Policing contingencies. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 2003.
[6]
Morton, H. Integrated Criminal Justice Information
Systems. National Conference of State Legislatures ed., 2004.
[7]
Shin, D.-S. Next Generation of Information
Infrastructure: A Comprehensive Case Study of Korea Versus the
United States of America. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science for Information Science and Technology, 50
(11). 1785-1800.
[8]
Whetten, D.A. Albert and Whetten Revisited:
Strengthening the Concept of Organizational Identity. Journal of
Management Inquiry, 15 (3). 219-234.

