Interdisciplinary Diversity in the iSchool Community
Andrea Wiggins
Syracuse University
337 Hinds Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244 USA

awiggins@syr.edu

ABSTRACT
Interdisciplinary research is both challenging and increasingly imperative to addressing many intellectual, social and
practical problems. This poster presents a proposed empirical study of interdisciplinary diversity in the iSchool community. Developing a better understanding of the factors
that allow interdisciplinary academic endeavors to survive
and thrive is useful to both the iSchools, for which the research would provide strategic feedback, and to the broader
scientific community as a means of insight into cultivating interdisciplinary research. The proposed study is expected to
contribute a methodological approach for evaluating diversity in an interdisciplinary community that will provide an
objective basis for self-evaluation and community-level comparisons, and empirical results that explore the relationship
between interdisciplinary intellectual inputs and interdisciplinary scholarly outputs in the iSchools.

Keywords
Interdisciplinary research, diversity, iSchools

1.

INTRODUCTION

Many have noted that interdisciplinary research is both challenging and increasingly imperative to addressing many intellectual, social and practical problems [17]. The proposed
research will examine the iSchool community to answer the
question of whether interdisciplinary intellectual inputs yield
interdisciplinary intellectual outputs. Developing a better
understanding of the factors that allow interdisciplinary academic endeavors to survive and thrive is in the interest of
both the iSchools, for which the research would provide
strategic feedback, and to the broader scientific community
as a means of insight into cultivating interdisciplinary research.
Prior empirical research on the relationship between faculty
hiring and prestige ratings in the emergent academic community of the iSchools showed that institutional and dis-

ciplinary diversity vary widely both among iSchools and
within them [21]. These findings motivate more detailed
study of the nature of interdisciplinary research, diversity,
and community in the iSchools. Examining how disciplinary
diversity within the faculty of an institution relates to the
diversity of research venues in which their work is presented
is a promising direction for future investigation.
The basic expectation that an intellectually diverse faculty—
one formed by scholars trained in a variety of disciplines, but
located together in an iSchool—publish in a similarly diverse
set of venues suggests a somewhat individualistic mode of
research. Integrative interdisciplinary research within an institution, however, could yield convergence to a smaller set
of publication venues, while the work itself may be no less
interdisciplinary in functional terms. The proposed research
will examine the degree to which intellectual interdisciplinarity relates to interdisciplinarity of the scholarly work, both
within each school and across the iSchool community.

2.

PRIOR WORK

Academic hiring patterns have been a recurring topic for
research in the sociology of science. These studies are typically focused on prestige out of concern for the potentially
detrimental effects of particularistic, rather than universalistic, hiring in the academy [3, 4, 5, 7, 12, 14, 15]. Collectively, these studies have shown that in longstanding academic disciplines, changes to the social structure are slow
and eventually lead to prestige stratification of the fields.
While these studies lay the groundwork for the proposed
research, they represent the concerns of mature academic
disciplines in which change is slow to permeate the institutional structure.
By contrast, the iSchools form an emergent, loosely-coupled
academic community that claims to have created an interdisciplinary environment. As a whole, the members of the
iSchool community are remarkably interdisciplinary, both
as a community and within institutional boundaries. While
this academic association has been building for some time,
the iSchools Caucus was only recently chartered in 20051 ,
and the community is currently in a period of initial development and identity alignment in which change is occurring
at a relatively fast rate.
As yet, there is little scholarly research on the iSchool community (see [8]), although there is an annual iConference,
1

http://www.ischools.org/oc/charter.html

currently in its fourth year. This venue for communitybuilding among members of the iSchools Caucus has generated a few self-reflective studies from the community, but
most of these are either largely theoretical or anecdotal [2,
6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 18, 19]. Very little of the discourse focused
on the iSchools as a phenomenon is based on empirical data,
and the most recent work demonstrates how errors in sampling for such a small academic community can lead to misrepresentations of the member institutions, particularly for
uncertified data [8].
A study of hiring patterns in the iSchools sought to address some of these issues through empirical research on
the relationship of prestige to hiring and identity in this
emergent academic community [21]. This research compared the structural characteristics of faculty hiring iSchools
and Computer Science departments. A key finding is noted
here: the disciplinary diversity of the iSchool community
was self-evident from 674 faculty PhD degrees in 172 areas
of study. While most of the faculty received degrees in the
categories of computer and information sciences or library
science, nearly half of the faculty members completed their
doctoral study in other disciplines. This striking observation from the data relating to the diversity of the iSchool
community motivates the currently proposed study to further investigate the interdisciplinary characteristics of the
iSchool community.

3.

RESEARCH APPROACH

The proposed study would be completed in three phases
of research effort, each corresponding to approximately one
month. The first phase consists of updating the iSchools
faculty hiring data set [20], and contacting each of the 21
iSchools for verification of their faculty rosters. While verification will require some time and coordination effort, participation is clearly in each institution’s own best interest as
well as the community’s interest. This step will produce a
more reliable data set for analysis.
The second phase of the research plan calls for data collection on iSchool faculty publication venues. These will be
drawn, where possible, from faculty CVs and web pages,
and supplemented with database queries as required. As
with the iSchool faculty hiring data set, the heterogeneity
of available information sources for these data means that
there are no simple and straightforward methods by which
to generate such a data set. To ensure data quality, a more
effortful but more reliable combination of manual and automatic tools will be employed to create an appropriate data
set for analysis.
The third phase of the study will entail data analysis and
dissemination of results. Data analysis will apply a measure
of inequality, information entropy, to evaluate diversity in
each iSchool. This simple measure indicates the evenness of
the distributions of the disciplinary areas of faculty for each
school when applied to the fields of study and publication
venues for each iSchool’s faculty, and provides continuous
scales by which to evaluate the variation between schools
within the community. The analysis will utilize a scientific
workflow analysis tool, the Taverna workbench2 , to gener2

http://taverna.sourceforge.net/

ate easily shared, self-documenting, and replicable analysis
workflows. Employing these tools and maintaining the data
set over time will permit replication of the analyses in the
future using additional data as the community evolves.

4.

EXPECTED CONTRIBUTIONS

The proposed research will develop and apply an analytic
approach by which to assess multiple aspects of intellectual
interdisciplinarity of groups within a larger community, such
as a school, college, or department. Building on prior research which has evaluated institutional interdisciplinarity
based on faculty areas of study [21], this project will compare pedigree-based interdisciplinarity to publication-based
interdisciplinarity, reflecting the diversity of faculty publication venues. While most research on faculty publications has
focused on the faculty productivity levels [1], with notable
problems in data collection due to the wide range of disciplines represented by faculty publication venues [16], the
proposed work will focus instead on evaluating the breadth
of disciplinary expertise represented by the iSchool intellectual community.
The intellectual contribution of the work will be the empirical study of interdisciplinarity in an emergent academic
community. The analysis and discussion will take into account both the intellectual resources of faculty disciplinary
expertise and the intellectual products of faculty research
publications. The findings will contribute to forming a solid
foundation, based on empirical research, for advancing discourse on interdisciplinarity within the iSchool community.
By providing an objective basis for self-evaluation and comparison within the community, as well as a new source of
insights for characterizing the community, this study will
also generate a pragmatic outcome for the iSchools. In addition, the study will bring a novel perspective and introduce
a new population of study into the literature on academic
hiring, which has not previously examined interdisciplinary
academic communities.
The methodological contribution of the work lies in the analytic approach, which will provide a means to evaluate
the impact of interdisciplinary institutions on scholarly discourse in traditional disciplinary fields. It also offers a method
for evaluating the breadth and scope of interdisciplinary research in the iSchools on multiple criteria. These methods
provide an objective basis for making community-level comparisons of the intellectual diversity of member groups, and
are readily applicable to other interdisciplinary academic
communities and research groups.
The research outputs from the study will include validated
data, analysis workflows, and publications, which will be
shared with the research community. Together, these research artifacts allow the reproduction of the analysis, and
form the basic infrastructure for developing and maintaining
a longitudinal data set to track the dynamics of the iSchool
community’s intellectual diversity.

5.

CONCLUSIONS

The goal of the proposed research is to conduct an empirical study to evaluate the interdisciplinarity of the iSchool
academic community with respect to both the intellectual
inputs and scholarly outputs of each school. This work will

extend prior research on the iSchools as an emergent intellectual community of interest, focusing on its intellectual
diversity. The study is expected to contribute a methodological approach for evaluating diversity in an interdisciplinary community, which provides an objective basis for
self-evaluation and community-level comparisons. The empirical results of the study will provide insight into the relationship between interdisciplinarity of intellectual inputs
and scholarly outputs in the iSchools.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Adkins and J. Budd. Scholarly productivity of u.s.
lis faculty. Library and Information Science Research,
in press, 2006.
[2] H. Annabi, K. E. Fisher, and J.-E. Mai. Our academic
life: Challenges facing i-schools. In iConference 2005,
September 28-30 2005.
[3] J. H. Bair. Hiring practices in finance education.
linkages among top-ranked graduate programs.
American Journal of Economics and Sociology,
62(2):429–433, 2003.
[4] S. Baldi. Prestige determinants of first academic job
for new sociology ph.d.s 1985-1992. The Sociological
Quarterly, 36(4):777–789, 1995.
[5] A. G. Bedeian and H. S. Feild. Academic stratification
in graduate management programs: Departmental
prestige and faculty hiring patterns. Journal of
Management, 6(2):99–115, 1980.
[6] H. Bruce, D. J. Richardson, and M. Eisenberg. The
i-conference: Gathering of the clans of information.
Bulletin of the ASIST, (April/May 2006), 2006.
[7] V. Burris. The academic caste system: Prestige
hierarchies in phd exchange networks. American
Sociological Review, 69(2):239, 2004.
[8] C. Chen. Thematic maps of 19 ischools. In Annual
meeting of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 2008.
[9] A. Dillon and M. L. Rice-Lively. Passing the
taxi-driver test. Bulletin of the ASIST, (April/May
2006), 2006.
[10] G. Harmon. The first i-conference of the i-school
communities. Bulletin of the ASIST, (April/May
2006), 2006.
[11] G. Harmon and A. Debons. The i-conference in
retrospect. Bulletin of the ASIST, (April/May 2006),
2006.
[12] J. G. Hunt and J. D. Blair. Content, process and the
matthew effect among management academics.
Journal of Management, 13(2):191–210, 1987.
[13] J. L. King. Identity in the i-school movement. Bulletin
of the ASIST, (April/May 2006), 2006.
[14] J. S. Long. Productivity and academic position in the
scientific career. American Sociological Review,
43(6):889–908, 1978.
[15] J. S. Long, P. D. Allison, and R. McGinnis. Entrance
into the academic career. American Sociological
Review, 44(5):816–830, 1979.
[16] L. I. Meho and K. M. Spurgin. Ranking the research
productivity of library and information science faculty
and schools: An evaluation of data sources and
research methods. Journal of the American Society for

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

Information Science and Technology, 56:1314–1331,
2005.
M. Nissani. Ten cheers for interdisciplinarity: The case
for interdisciplinary knowledge and research. The
Social Science Journal, 34(2):201–216, 1997.
J. Thomas, R. von Dran, and S. Sawyer. The
i-conference and the transformation ahead. Bulletin of
the ASIST, (April/May 2006), 2006.
M. Tyworth and S. Sawyer. I-conference identity and
issues survey summary. In iConference 2005, pages
1–6, October 12 2005.
A. Wiggins. Exploring Peer Prestige in Academic
Hiring Networks. Master’s thesis, University of
Michigan School of Information, 2007.
A. Wiggins, M. J. McQuaid, and L. A. Adamic.
Community identity: Academic hiring and peer
prestige in the ischools. In iConference 2008, 2008.

