iSchools in developing countires: Developing a
telecommunications program for the Republic of Kosovo
Martin Weiss

David Tipper

Robert Hayden

School of Information Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh PA 15260
+1 412 624 9430

School of Information Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh PA 15260
+1 412 624 9421

Russian & East European Studies Ctr
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh PA 15260
+1 412 648 7404

mbw@pitt.edu

dtipper@sis.pitt.edu

rhayden@pitt.edu

ABSTRACT
This paper describes a collaborative project between the
University of Pittsburgh and the University of Pristina in building
a program of study in telecommunications in Kosovo. This has
not only been been a notable service project for the University of
Pittsburgh, it is also a way to begin extending the iSchool concept
into developing economies like Kosovo.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
A.m (Miscellaneous)

General Terms
Management, Economics, Legal Aspects.

Keywords
Kosovo, USAID,

1. INTRODUCTION
In the wake of the destructive war of the late 1990s, the newly
independent state of Kosovo still has many needs. Among them is
a modern telecommunications infrastructure and career
opportunities for the many young people who are unemployed.
Telecommunications is a key infrastructure for any country
wishing to be competitive in the global economy, and education is
an important factor in building a competitive workforce that will
stimulate investment in Kosovo.
In addition to capital investment, building a telecommunications
infrastructure requires operational expertise and an educated
workforce. In their November, 2007 assessment [1], the US
Agency for International Development (USAID) identified the
telecommunications sector as one having potential for improving
the high unemployment rate among young people in Kosovo. In
this study, they found that the telecommunications sector firms
imported skilled personnel because adequately trained personnel
were difficult to find internally.
This stimulated a request for proposals from USAID’s Higher
Education Development (HED) branch to address this need.
Given the University of Pittsburgh’s long experience in the region
(through its Russian and Eastern European Studies (REES)
program, telecommunications education (through its iSchool) and
international education (through the School of Education’s
Institute for International Studies in Education (IISE)), this RFP
was a good fit, and was awarded this project in April 2008.
Thus, this project is designed to address two of Kosovo’s pressing
needs by assisting with the challenges of human resource

development and building a close industry-academia partnership
in Kosovo’s telecom sector. The ultimate goal of this partnership
is to improve Kosovo’s economy through private sector
engagement and workforce development. As recent reports on the
situation in Kosovo indicate (see [2]), much work remains to be
done, and we can expect it to take many years to achieve selfsustaining growth.
Given USAID’s emphasis on private sector investment, this
program will build an education program that educates young
people whose skills are be consistent with the local industry’s
needs. This will be accomplished by building a modern
laboratory and integrating laboratory experiences into the
curriculum and through extensive engagement with the local
industry through an Industry Advisory Council (IAC), which is a
novel approach for the University of Pristina (UP).
Even in this relatively early stage of reconstruction, it is
appropriate to introduce topics in the domain of iSchools into the
educational system. While the UP faculty in this partnership are
technology focussed, they are quite aware of their broader needs
in the information professions.

2. Project description
There are three key elements to achieve our overarching objective.
The first element is to develop and reinforce a relationship
between local industry and UP’s Faculty of Electrical and
Computer Engineering. The next element is to demonstrate
practice-oriented instruction by inviting UP faculty members to
the University of Pittsburgh for extended stays. Finally we will
work directly with the UP faculty in developing and delivering a
program of study in telecommunications. Our specific goals for
this three-year project are to:
Work with the UP faculty on building an ongoing
relationship with industry for the purpose of developing an
intellectually rigorous telecommunications curriculum that
meets the needs of industry in Kosovo.
Help the UP faculty build the capability to respond to
environmental changes (that is, changing industry needs and
changing technologies) with appropriate curricular changes.
Provide faculty members at UP with curriculum materials,
instructional expertise, telecommunications laboratory
equipment, and examples of hands-on laboratory experiences
to supplement classroom education.
Develop a student internship program at UP and negotiate
internship experiences and opportunities with industry in
Kosovo (and possibly elsewhere).

Collaborate on providing classroom education for the first
two cohorts of students to enroll under the new
telecommunications curriculum.
Develop a plan for continuing collaboration between the
faculties and students of Pitt and UP after the project period
ends.
The new program of study in telecommunications will be
delivered through UP’s Faculty of Electrical and Computer
Engineering. In keeping with UP’s strategy, this educational
program must be aligned with the European Union’s Bologna
Process. As a result, UP currently offers three-year undergraduate
degrees and two-year graduate degrees. The initial plans for the
telecommunications program are focused on the two-year
graduate degree. Graduate programs also require a thesis under
Bologna, and, to offer a PhD in the future, the faculty must be
actively engaged in research. Since UP’s semesters run from late
September to late January and from late February to June, there is
a two-month period available for students to pursue full-time
summer internship experiences.
The offices, classrooms, and some of the laboratory facilities for
UP’s telecommunications program are located in a building with
the rest of the engineering faculty at some distance from the main
campus. Another building that houses additional labs is located
nearby, but is currently partially occupied by the Kosovo Defense
Force. The conditions of the laboratory facilities for engineering
students are variable. While laboratories to support computer
programming instruction are typical of those found in most
universities worldwide, the facilities in support of instruction in
data networking and electronics are either limited or dated.
Although computer programming and basic electronics instruction
would not be addressed at the graduate level, the UP engineering
laboratory facilities in their current state point to the limitations in
hands-on experience that one would expect from students in the
program. With no data routing equipment, the networking lab
offers little capability for teaching students the fundamentals of
data networking in an applied way. These problems regarding
available educational facilities will need to be addressed by the
project.

2.1 Faculty Development.
Professional education places different demands on a faculty and
its facilities than traditional, theory-based education. Professors
must engage students in a way that highlights the current practice
of theoretical concepts, which requires active learning techniques
supplemented with hands-on laboratory experiences. It is often
beneficial to complement this classroom-based experience with
internships or cooperative education. Professors engaged in
professional education must also be mindful of the difference
between “education” and “training”. At Pitt, our goal is to provide
sufficient practical skills so that our graduates will contribute to
their employers quickly, while also having enough theoretical
knowledge and background that they remain productive over the
course of a career. This balance can sometimes be challenging to
strike.
In our experience, faculty members whose background is not
rooted in professional education often require retraining to help
them adapt to a more practice-oriented approach. We propose to
provide such training for the UP faculty by:
Creating an Industry Advisory Council (IAC) consisting of
representatives of current and emerging telecommunications

employers in Kosovo, who will be given an active role in
providing feedback to the UP faculty on the curriculum. We
are working with the IAC and the faculty to coach both
groups in building this relationship by holding joint meetings
three to four times per year, at a minimum, during the project
period. The first such meeting was already held and was very
promising. Engaging the IAC in such a detailed manner will
create a sense of shared purpose that can assist UP students
with job placement after their studies end.
Working with UP faculty to educate them about learning
outcomes-oriented curriculum design. Many faculty
members outside of the field of education have learned the
craft of teaching by observing their professors and mentors
when they were students, and therefore are unfamiliar with
the process of basing curriculum design on expected learning
outcomes. To address this issue, we will engage curriculum
design experts from the faculty of Pitt’s School of Education
to consult with the UP faculty as they review their
curriculum. The goal is not to redesign the curriculum for
them, but to help them through the process of accomplishing
this themselves by providing constructive feedback,
curriculum design examples, sample curriculum materials,
and support in overcoming barriers along the way.
Rotating three junior faculty members from UP’s
telecommunications program through Pitt’s Master’s of
Science in Telecommunications and Networking (MST)
program. These faculty members, to be selected in
consultation with the UP leadership, will have the
opportunity to earn credit toward a Pitt advanced degree; to
participate in a summer internship experience with a U.S.
company following the academic year spent at Pitt; and to
experience the use of practice-oriented learning techniques.
We will provide instruction in these techniques while the UP
faculty members are resident in Pittsburgh, demonstrating
how to incorporate labs into their courses and how to engage
local industry more effectively.
Educating the UP faculty regarding the process of continuous
curriculum evaluation. The Graduate Telecommunications
and Networking program at Pitt has undergone significant
curriculum redesigns approximately every five years since its
inception in 1986. The first redesign incorporated the
growing importance of the Internet; the second added a PhD
program; the third incorporated a new track of study in
wireless, reflecting the increasing importance of those
technologies in the late 1990s; and the fourth introduced a
track in network security, in response to the changes in the
post 9/11 world. Currently, the Pitt faculty are engaged in
another redesign effort to move the focus of study in
telecommunications away from the physical layer and more
toward network management and applications, again
reflecting changes in the industry. We will work with UP’s
faculty to pass on this culture of continuous curriculum
evaluation and attention to industrial needs, as well as
techniques for incorporating the discoveries from this
process into their curriculum.

2.2 Curriculum Development.
To meet USAID’s goals for this program, we plan to directly
engage UP faculty and local industry as partners in curriculum
development. As stated above, representatives of local industry in
Kosovo will be organized into an Industrial Advisory Council
(IAC), which will meet with the UP faculty three to four times per

year during the project period, and will be strongly encouraged by
the project team to continue meeting beyond this three-year period
as well. UP faculty will be engaged in the curriculum design
process using a top-down approach, starting with the
establishment of learning outcomes for the curriculum, and
ultimately leading to the establishment of course syllabi and
student evaluation instruments that are geared to learning
outcomes. Junior faculty members from UP will be in residence at
Pitt on a rotating basis to observe and participate in active and
hands-on learning approaches, as mentioned above.

2.3 Private Sector Involvement.
Recruiting private sector representatives to the IAC was
somewhat challenging in an environment with a limited or nonexistent tradition of cooperation between academia and industry.
Most IAC representatives came from Kosovo, since the goal is to
educate students for the emerging Kosovar economy. The IAC
members should be broadly representative of local industry, and
should include participation by the incumbent telephone company
(PTK), the competitive mobile service provider (iPKO), the larger
and smaller Internet Service Providers (ISPs), and Community
Access Television (CATV) providers, as well as broadcasters,
satellite service providers, and the Telecommunications
Regulatory Authority (ART, http://www.art-ks.org/). Other
potential stakeholders consist of equipment and service vendors
serving the local market; also, Cisco and Microsoft run training
operations in Kosovo. Appendix 2 of the November 2007 USAID
report Assessment of the Kosovo Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT) Sector contains a list of
contacts that were interviewed for the report, which was be a good
starting point for recruitment of the IAC.

2.4 Practice-Oriented Education
The Graduate Telecommunications and Networking Program in
SIS has an expressed purpose of preparing students for the
workplace, with equal emphasis on theory and practice. Job
placement rates have been very high since the program’s
inception in 1986. The program was founded with a grant from
AT&T, and has since gathered formal and informal feedback from
industrial partners through committees and one-on-one
conversations, as well as through its own industrial advisory
council. The program’s current industrial advisory council
includes representatives from service providers (e.g., Verizon),
equipment manufacturers (e.g., Ericsson), application developers
(e.g., Google), and end user organizations (e.g., FedEx). Our plan
is to bring these experiences of practice-oriented education to UP
as they establish a program of study in telecommunications.
Another significant feature of Pitt’s telecommunications program
has been its laboratory environments. Throughout the many
curriculum and course content changes that have taken place, a
persistent question has been: “What are the labs associated with
this course?” We have built a substantial portfolio of lab
experiences. These labs provide a structured tour for students
through a sometimes complex environment, enabling them to
discover for themselves what has been taught in the classroom. In
the process, they begin to learn how to use and manage network
equipment. While our portfolio of labs may not be the exact set
that UP’s faculty need, they will provide a foundation of
workable, useful experiences for students that can be adapted to
the Kosovo environment.

3. Project activities to date
In the months since the project has been awarded, we have made
significant progress. At the project launch in Pristina, initial
contact with industry representatives was made. These contacts
have formed the basis for the IAC. In addition, an project
coordinator in Kosovo was interviewed (and hired), and the first
UP faculty member to visit Pittsburgh was identified. This faculty
member is now in residence at Pitt.
The key UP faculty for this program visited Pittsburgh for a series
of intensive meetings. During this week, the faculty were
familiarized with Pitt’s telecom program and the motivations that
drive its structure and approach, as well as a deep familiarization
with Pitt’s laboratory environment. In addition, the UP faculty
were introduced to objectives-oriented curriculum design by the
IISE faculty. With this background, the UP faculty undertook a
radical redesign of their curriculum, which resulted in a focussed
set of eductional experiences for their prospective students. In
addition, this design enabled the UP faculty to develop a detailed
set of laboratory requirements.
The redesigned curriculum, which is currently being fleshed out,
is an adaption of Pitt’s MST curriculum, not a wholesale adoption.
The UP faculty face different requirements, in part because they
are part of an engineering faculty. In addition, their curriculum
must be carefully crafted to take advantage of the knowledge and
skills of the incoming students. This results in a somewhat more
technically oriented curriculum, because Pitt’s MST program is
designed for students with a greater variety of undergraduate
degrees, not just electrical engineering or computer engineering.
Soon after their return to Pristina, the first meeting of the IAC was
convened. After a formal opening, the IAC members and the
faculty engaged in a frank and open dialog about the proposed
curriculum. The faculty are considering the advice and will
present a more detailed version of the curriculum to the IAC in the
coming months before seeking the necessary approvals at UP.
The advice offered by the IAC included some specific topics
recommended for inclusion into the curriculum, a re-ordering of
some courses, and a recommendation that the language of
instruction be English. A significant fraction of the IAC members
are graduates of UP’s electrical engineering program and are
currently with telecommunications carriers as well as large users
of networks. Their familiarity with the curriculum as well as the
industrial environment gave their recommendations additional
weight.
Finally, an IISE faculty member travelled to Kosovo to conduct a
baseline assessment. This assessment consisted of extensive
questionnaires and interviews and will be useful for assessing the
progress that the project made at the end of the three year period.
In the coming months, we will be finalizing UP’s curriculum and
constructing their labs.
The graduate program in
telecommunications at UP will begin with the Fall 2009 semester.

4. Conclusions
Supporting the UP faculty in building a practice oriented
educational program in telecommunications has been personally
and professionally rewarding. USAID has been a valuable partner
for both their insight and the financial resources. The project
team is hopeful that the successes in the telecommunications
domain can be extended and repeated in other ares of interest to
iSchools.

There are many factors that affect the success of a project like
this. In this project, strong leadership from the Dean of the
Faculty of Electical and Computer Engineering has proven to be
crucial, as has explicit support from UP’s Vice Rektors. The
Dean’s personal reputation in the local industry has made creating
the IAC easier, as many of the IAC members are alumni. In
addition, the Dean’s leadership has diminished the challenge the
faculty faced when they were given 600 additional new students
to teach this fall semester. External factors such as this can have
an enormous impact but can also be managed with leadership.
This program offers mutual benefits beyond this particular
project. The University of Pittsburgh’s Center for Russian and
East European Studies (REES) benefits from the richer contacts
and experience in this region that this project offers. Students and
faculty in Pitt’s Telecommunications program have the
opportunity to expand their experience base; further, it adds to the
ongoing effort to explicitly introduce experience with
international partners into students’ experiences. This is an asset
in the increasingly globalized economy.
While USAID’s support was and continues to be critical in this
project, we cannot count on this support in the long term. We
expect the Master’s program to be self-sustained by the end of the
project period, as the faculty at UP will be at full strength. To
expand the program into PhD eduction has further implications

and requires a different kind of partnership. First of all, some of
the current faculty members will have to obtain PhDs themselves;
secondly, our partnership will have to be expanded to include
research relationships. Continuting the partnership in this way
will require a different economic model; it is unclear whether
USAID is the appropriate partner for such a project.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our thanks to USAID and HED for their support and our
colleagues on the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering
at the University of Pristina for their commitment to working with
us on this project.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Payne, J., Ducker, M. and Peja, D. 2007. Assessment of the
Kosovo Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
Sector. USAID, November 15, 2007.
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADK675.pdf.
[2] Garcia, R.M. 2008. Kosovo Economic Performance
Assessment. USAID, May 2008.
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADL767.pdf

