Life-Cycle Thinking: What can IT do to be green?
Shuyuan Mary Ho

Conrad F. Metcalfe

Syracuse University

Performance Systems Development

325 Hinds, School of Information Studies

124 Brindley Street, Ste. #4

Syracuse, NY 13244-4100

Ithaca, NY 14850

(315) 443-7267

(607) 277-6240

smho@syr.edu

cmetcalfe@psdconsulting.com

ABSTRACT
Sustainability is a critical theme in transforming both our
environment and our society to adapt to the rigorous demands of
the future. This paper serves an educational purpose, and
introduces the central concept of sustainability; life-cycle
thinking. Three fundamental problems are discussed with the
purpose of highlighting the importance and awareness of energy
use, environmental protection, and the potential for climate
change. Our current industrialized economy is highly dependent
on non-renewable fossil fuels that have many negative effects on
our way of life, and it will take the combined efforts of every
sector of society to develop suitable alternatives. In response, this
paper examines the role of information technology (IT) in
assisting sustainable activities which can transform our economy,
environment and society. We discuss several opportunities for
change, such as innovation, new technology adoption,
manufacturing, cyber-infrastructure, IT management for campus
operations, and IT research into sustainability activities, etc. in the
context of how information technology – and iSchool activities
can support transformation to a green economy. In conclusion, the
importance of green activities - and research into opportunities for
sustainability are emphasized.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4 [Computers and Society].

General Terms
Reliability, Management.

Keywords
Sustainability, Campus Operations.

1. INTRODUCTION
Our society was agriculturally-based up until approximately 1900,
when the industrial revolution enacted major social changes on
just about everything. With the discovery of oil, industrial
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
iConference’09, Feb 8-11, 2009, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
Copyright 2009 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0004…$5.00.

production and transportation became cheap, and our entire
culture was shifted accordingly. Families could move farther
apart, yet still see one another. The workplace could be farther
from the home. The food we eat could be grown in California and
shipped to New York without adding much to the overall lifecycle cost. As we now come to the end of this era of cheap
energy, we will have to change consumer behavior by relocalizing our lives, paying special attention to the life cycle of
the goods and services that sustain us. We need to re-examine the
ways that we interface with the global economy to figure out what
makes sense with regards to sustainability. We need to migrate
our communities to focus on using products and eating foods that
are produced locally and/or require less energy - to reduce the use
of carbon-based fossil fuels.
We had mechanistic worldview even before our industrialization
[2, 15]. A mechanistic perspective does not take into
consideration the interconnectivity of our many disparate systems
(or elements). The mechanistic / industrialist world-view
encourages us to look at things as separate components rather than
understanding the integration of systems. But in fact, as in the
natural world, everything needs to be integrated for sustainability
cycles to be maintained. The mechanistic perspective is a useful
model to observe, but we must move beyond this to look at
systems in a larger perspective befitting a lifecycle analysis.
Our current economy is not sustainable; all our major systems are
based on fossil fuels that are now becoming more and more
expensive. This basic truism will have a huge impact on
transportation systems, food production systems, manufacturing
systems, economic systems, and our most basic life-support
systems as well. In our society, there has been virtually no
thought given to the large-scale sustainability of the basic
fundamentals required for day-to-day survival. For example,
despite the fact that the majority of advanced society eats meat at
most meals, this diet is not really sustainable. Worldwide, we do
not have enough productive farm land to sustain the earth’s
population through conversion of plant matter to beef and then to
humans. As a result, humans will eventually be forced to eat
lower on the food chain. This is just one example of how
increasing populations will require re-thinking of basic human
needs.
An even more compelling example might be the way we have
come to think about waste. Product designers have been trained to
design obsolescence into the development of all products; useful
for a period of time, and then discarded so the consumer buys
again. This creates a cycle of waste that is now threatening the
health and well-being of the entire industrialized world. Landfills

are building up at an alarming rate, and cities are being forced to
spend significant money to separate this waste from the people
creating it. In response, our entire product life-cycle needs to be
reformed. And we need sustainability to be worked in to every
part of our human life-cycle as well.

addition, much of the under-developed world is now looking to
emulate the western civilization. This means that the cost of all
energy, commodities, and even the most basic necessities, will
continue to rise accordingly.

The characteristics that made our civilization great now actually
threaten to overwhelm us. But the many problems we face can
also be viewed as opportunities. Overall, we have the opportunity
to make the world a better place for our future generations. If we
do not, we will face a world of scarcity and struggle. So the need
to re-think our activities in a holistic way also offers us the
opportunity to correct some mistakes we have made. The
consumerist petroleum-based economy that has created so much
wealth is now starting to unravel. The system that will replace the
current economy is now being referred to as the “green”
economy.

The environment we are living in is constantly being degraded
[18]. This depletion of resources includes even the most basic
necessities; air, water and soil. Our ecosystems have become
damaged and our life support systems have become significantly
compromised. The degraded and polluted environment results in
poor health across the population, for example; cancer, asthma,
toxic chemical build-up, etc. Poor health amongst the population
also results in increased health costs, and adds to the complexity
of possible solutions. The costs of re-claiming the environment,
and the costs associated with shielding the populace from the
harmful effects of large-scale environmental degradation will
inevitably start to have an impact on the costs of all goods and
services.

In order to enable the green economy, we must each ask a
question in everything we do: “Is it sustainable?” People need to
have the sustainability infused into their mental framework for all
things created, generated, built, manufactured, operated and
managed. As such, life-cycle thinking must also be included when
we are shaping and re-shaping information systems for the benefit
of our society. This will enable information technology (IT) to
support the movement towards a sustainable green economy.

2. FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS
There are three fundamental problems in the industrialized
societal development which impact the future of our society.

2.1 The End of Inexpensive Energy
The use of fossil fuel in our current economy is still growing
exponentially, yet supplies within easy reach are diminishing [1].
We are on the downside of the bell curve that represents oil
supplies while demand continues to rise. As Figure 1 depicts, the
exploration and extraction of oil development that started in the
mid-1800’s has increased steadily ever since, but it is now widely
recognized that accessible supplies are being used up [19].

2.2 Environmental Degradation

2.3 Climate Change
In a long-term evaluation of the climate, human activities in
general may be starting to affect the atmosphere. Changes
recently noted by scientists worldwide include a rise in average
global temperatures, revised patterns of high-altitude wind
channels, rising sea levels as a result of deteriorating structural ice
around the world [9, 14, 21]. Carbon dioxide 1 levels (parts per
million) are rising worldwide at an alarming rate [16], and other
“greenhouse gases” are also rising in patterns that are
uncharacteristic of natural cycles. As Figure 2 depicts, the rise in
greenhouse gas may be causing an increase in global temperature
that cannot easily be reversed [19].

Figure 2: Rising CO associated with higher global
temperatures

Figure 1: Oil and Gas Liquids 2004 Scenario
According to Duncan’s Olduvai Theory, it is becoming
increasingly difficult to locate and obtain fossil fuels [5]. Fuels
are not exactly running out; but, developers will have to go deeper
and farther to obtain fossil fuels. Meanwhile, our whole firstworld economy is totally dependant on fossil fuels – civilization
as we know it requires an endless supply of low-cost energy. In

Recently, it is becoming generally accepted that weather patterns
are becoming increasingly unpredictable. There is basic
agreement among top scientists worldwide that these climactic
changes are being caused by the non-sustainable activities of
humans, and this may be drastically affecting the environment we
are living in [8].

1

Same as CO2.

3. LIFE-CYCLE THINKING
The mechanistic world-view began to dominate our society in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, encouraging scientists to look
at things as separate components rather than parts of integrated
systems [2, 15]. Consequently, natural systems began to be
looked at in the same way that industrial designers looked at
machines. Integration points were defined in the natural systems,
with very few organized attempts to understand the larger
ecosystematic infrastructure as a whole. When society moved
away from its agricultural base, it also moved away from the
associated natural world-view. Industrial society was defined by
the machines that started to gain widespread acceptance as a sign
of progress. Today, it is time to realize that we lost some very
important lessons in this transformation.
In nature’s economy, nothing is ever wasted. Everything is used,
recycled, and re-used. When animals die in nature, the carcass
provides food for other animals. When plants die, their decayed
remains become nutrients for other plants. Leaves fall from the
trees and become compost to sustain the same tree. Nature
provides many examples of this type of natural recycling of
nutrients.

calculators are one of many IT innovative examples. They require
an individual to input key data about his or her life activities, and
then calculate the amount of carbon produced as a result. Once an
individual understands what activities create the most carbon,
modifying one’s life style can be planned to reduced one’s carbon
footprint. There are several carbon calculators that have been
developed:
•

Nature Conservancy 2

•

Clean Air Cool Planet 3

•

Empowerment Institute 4

The technology and design of each carbon calculator listed here
reflects a slightly different focus, and each will yield a slightly
different number to characterize the carbon-generating activities
of the end-user. But the IT community is making a significant
contribution regarding technological design and innovation in
continuing to refine the algorithms that define society’s carbon
footprint. The real and required improvement lies in reducing
carbon emissions by calculating and educating society as to how
much carbon each individual has produced as we try to improve.

Adopting the same basic principles, our design strategy in all
human engineering endeavors should include life-cycle thinking.
The concept of “cradle to grave” (products used and discarded)
has characterized product design strategy since the dawn of the
industrial age. However, as we go forward this strategy has to be
replaced with the concept of “cradle-to-cradle.” Products need to
be designed in a way that when their useful life ends, there is a
plan. Used plastics need to be collected, shredded, and processed
to become the raw materials for new plastic products. Metals from
old cars or machines need to be separated and melted down to
produce the raw materials for new cars and machines.

4.1.2 Building Modeling Software

The concept of recycling - and doing more with less - is critical
for all sectors of society. As such, it needs to be encouraged in IT
innovation, adoption, manufacturing, cyber infrastructurebuilding, operation, and management. The IT community should
infuse life-cycle thinking into all facets of information systems
innovation.

The National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL) has developed
SUNREL™, a physics calculation engine that is useful in the
modeling of the building’s life-cycle for energy purposes [4]. This
engine is an energy simulation program that ensures that
occasional dramatic changes in temperature do not affect the
overall calculations of energy use. Because the amount of energy
used is greater when outdoor temperatures are significantly
different than indoor temperatures, dramatic weather fluctuations
must be taken out of the equation in order to maintain the
accuracy of building modeling.

4. IT ENABLING THE GREEN ECONOMY
In the context of life-cycle thinking, we present several examples
of how information technology can enable the next “green”
economy in real-time practical ways.

4.1 IT Innovation
To understand how we use energy is the first step. Information
systems are being built to easily calculate energy use (and waste)
of individuals, and entities such as a building or a manufacturing
process.

4.1.1 Carbon Calculators
Carbon is one of the more prevalent greenhouse gases [13].
Human activity cannot help but create carbon dioxide. Even so,
the carbon-producing activities of most Americans have
dramatically exceeded those of most other countries. However
there are many ways to reduce carbon. The amount of carbon one
produces is referred to as one’s “carbon footprint” [11]. The first
step to reducing an individual’s carbon footprint is to figure out
how much carbon his or her activities generate. Carbon

IT can also help estimate the amount of energy we use in the lifecycle of our living spaces, and the amount of energy we can save.
Building modeling software is another example of IT innovation,
which makes it easy for building professionals to calculate energy
use and identify key activities that can reduce energy waste.
When energy bills are included and validated as part of the
modeling, the model can be “calibrated” with such precision that
it is possible to determine exactly what energy-saving
improvements will yield the best results with a high degree of
accuracy.

An example of IT innovation built upon this SUNREL physics
engine is a software product, called TREAT 5 (an acronym for
Targeted Residential Energy Analysis Tools). TREAT is a set of
energy analysis tools for modeling the energy consumption of
buildings, as a means to identify the most cost-effective energy
efficiency upgrades for both single-family and multifamily
buildings. TREAT allows building professionals to make
educated decisions about how to eliminate energy waste. TREAT
is one example of how software can make a significant impact on
2

www.nature.org/initiatives/climatechange/calculator/

3

http://dev.cleanair-coolplanet.org/toolkit/inv-calculator.php

4

www.empowermentinstitute.net/lcd/lcd_files/LCDcalcNet.html

5

http://treatsoftware.psdconsulting.com/

human activity, with the goal of reducing energy use, energy
waste, and the carbon emissions that result. The IT community
has the potential to make many significant contributions to help
make human activity sustainable, and the list is limited only by
our collective imagination.

4.2 IT Adoption
Information technology can be adopted to assist with the task of
reducing energy waste. A few examples below demonstrate how
life-cycle thinking is infused in IT adoption, which improves a
sustainable community.

4.2.1 Programmable Buildings
The heating and cooling of buildings produce bulk of carbon
worldwide. Many opportunities exist to improve building
performance by using technologically-based improvement
strategies. For example, real-time web-based monitoring and
automated control of building operating systems can help to solve
building performance problems as they occur. Simply adding a
programmable thermostat can result in significant energy (and
carbon) savings to a building’s operating system. This single
example of information technology adoption can pay for itself in
a short period of time. Automated sun-shading, automated
ventilation systems, and automated lighting control can all make a
huge difference if appropriately adopted and maintained.

4.2.2 Benchmarking Building Tools
To make educated decisions regarding the building performance
of large non-residential buildings, IT offers the opportunity to
make comparisons regarding energy within a community. One
example of this is the benchmarking of building performance 6 .
Benchmarking allows for building comparisons that can help
building owners and operations managers to make useful
decisions about where to implement energy-based improvements.
Benchmarking sets a baseline for energy utilization, whereby a
building can be compared to other buildings of similar size and
use-type - and to itself over time. This is initially helpful in
determining which buildings (in a group) need the most
improvement. Once improvements are made, tracking the
performance of a building’s systems can provide important data
that can be used to maintain or increase energy efficiency and
reduce carbon emissions. Long-term reporting is required to
determine the effectiveness of energy/carbon reducing efforts
over time. Underneath the user interface for benchmarking tools,
there is a database and a set of algorithms. Data from utility
companies - from energy improvements – from carbon footprint
measurements – and more - are archived and used to make
important decisions on energy use and energy waste.

4.2.3 Power Surge Switching Technology
Another example of IT adoption is the study of switching
undesirable power surge [3] because power surges can reduce the
efficiency of the power supply, and consequently the amount of
power drawn by computer accessories when they are not being
used.

6

Compass is an example of a benchmarking tool for large
buildings.

4.2.4 Smart Grid Technologies
On a larger scale, “smart grid” technologies are just starting to be
considered by utility companies that have a vested interest in
meeting the power demands of their customers. Smart grid
technologies are defined as a digital upgrade of distribution and
long distance power transmission using a combination of
advanced communications, strategically-placed sensors, and
distributed computer controllers to improve the efficiency,
reliability and safety of electricity delivery and use [12]. IT is a
critical element of this new and over-arching vision for an
intelligent infrastructure that seeks to deliver power to end-users
instantaneously - based on real-time use requirements.

4.3 IT Manufacturing
From a direct aspect of life-cycle thinking, computer components,
devices, or production lines, etc. need to be redesigned and reengineered according to the concept of “cradle-to-cradle.”
Computer systems need to be developed and manufactured to
reduce waste, not produced as a one-time use commodity.
Laptops and their components should not be disposable. They
should be designed to last longer, and then to be recycled.
Components should be replaceable and upgradeable in a cost
effective manner. The social and environmental implications of
the entire life-cycle of IT components (such as computers,
monitors, keyboards, etc.) - from the source of raw materials through to the production and ultimately disposal - must be taken
into account.

4.4 Cyber Infrastructure
When implementing cyber infrastructure, life-cycle thinking
should also be planned and incorporated into network
infrastructure design. For example, alternative solutions for less
energy and resources should be put in the client-server
architecture.

4.4.1 Thin Client Computing
When planning a client-server architecture network, a processing
server can be placed centrally, with multiple thin clients
connected to its services. A thinner client 7 can allocate more
processing activities to the server, and require fewer servers to
accomplish relatively the same processing.

4.4.2 Software-based vs. Hardware-based
To further reduce resource requirements, software-based routing
or firewall solution should be considered more desirable than
having a hardware-based routing or firewall solution.

4.4.3 Virtual Machine
The use of virtual machine provides high-level program
representation, which allows large networks to be programmable
in a simplified and energy-efficient manner [10].

4.4.4 Grid Computing
Grid computing is a scalable, distributed networking environment
where a clustered computers work together to solve a single
problem. The fact that grid computing utilizes the processing
7

such as http://www.ncomputing.com/

power from distributed thin clients can replace the needs of using
supercomputer [6]. Grid infrastructure will enable power usage on
each thin client. When a thin client is turned on, it can share some
unused processing power to solve another task that requires much
processing power in the grid environment.

4.5 IT Management for Campus Operations
iSchools should be more than just an “engine of innovation,” but
should take a leadership role in reaching out to the community to
drive ecosystematic thinking in local systems. To be effective in
this way, sustainable life-cycle thinking needs to be integrated
into all iSchool activities.

4.5.1 Campus Life-Cycle
“Buying green” is a concept being promoted by a governmentbased program called EPEAT 8 . Energy Star standards have been
widely adopted for government purchases at the Federal, State,
and Local government levels. Additional requirements around
reducing packaging waste and management for product end-oflife should be engineered and designed for environment.
All purchasing decisions should be made with thoughts of
sustainability. Reusing things that are typically thrown away has
an important role. For example, when SUNY New Paltz 9 required
new desks because of worn desk-surfaces, instead of purchasing
new desks, a decision was made to turn over the desktops
themselves and reuse the desks instead of buying new. In this
case, students have new desk surface to use, and schools can be
exempted from purchasing new desks. There are many examples
of ways that resources which are typically wasted can be utilized
to reduce the purchasing requirements of school operations, and
every instance that results in less manufacturing also results in a
reduced energy use and carbon emissions. For example, typically
lockers are cleaned out at the end of each academic year, and the
leftover contents are discarded. In a forward-thinking iSchool, a
green staffperson could be positioned in the school maintenance
department, whose role is to clean out those lockers, and recycle
useful supplies among incoming students.
Re-lamping (replacing incandescent light bulbs with compact
florescent lamps), and perhaps ultimately LED bulbs (lightemitting diode) provides easy and effective ways to reduce energy
and carbon when applied campus-wide. Education on “green”
behaviors, such as closing windows and turning off lights when
not being used, are critical practices in reforming basic campus
activities.

4.5.2 Reuse and Recycle Hardware
Re-use and recycling of hardware for computer labs should be
considered as part of student education. For example, Google
recycled old AT computers to build servers for the infrastructure
and foundation for what has become a huge industry of data
aggregation. The fact that Google chose to utilize out-dated
equipment - rather than purchase new servers - was a decision
based on cost as well as resource management [7, 17]. Google

8

EPEAT stands for Electronic Product Environmental
Assessment Tool. http://www.epeat.net

9

http://www.newpaltz.edu/news/news.cfm?id=4491

serves as a role model and an example of the many creative
opportunities that exist for IT.

4.5.3 Forming Action Groups
Sustainability action groups for energy efficiency and climate
protection initiative can be formed and organized on campus.
iSchools should form such committees for ongoing localized
coordination with the national Association for Sustainability in
Higher Education (AASHE) in publicizing and encouraging green
activities in campus activities and operations.

4.6 IT Research into Debatable Activities
There should be more research encouraged regarding sustainable
activities in information technology. The issues of sustainability
in information technology are complex and far-reaching. For
example, the debate on whether to leave hard-drives spinning
when not use (which uses more electricity) versus shutting
computer down (which means more “wear and tear” on the
hardware – leading to earlier disposal) needs resolution.
Addressing issues like this is referred to as “triple bottom line.”
The term, “triple bottom line” refers to the uses and impacts of
information technology on 1) economy, 2) environment, and 3)
society. Life-cycle considerations must include an expanded
spectrum of values and criteria for measuring organizational /
societal acceptability.

5. CONCLUSION
Nature showcases competition in many ways. However, from a
high-altitude perspective, such competition is a very refined level
of cooperation. The eagle feeds on the mouse, but each player in
this life-and-death struggle is also part of a larger dance of life,
where mice are free to grow, and where the eagle has its own
predators to deal with. The concept of “coop-etition” is one that
our societal planners must adopt, to place the interests of the
masses (and future generations) before the interests of the
individual. The synergistic planning of integrated sustainability
needs to be ingrained in our societal systems at all levels.
Our current society, based on non-renewable energy and nonrecyclable waste, is in jeopardy of driving off a metaphorical cliff.
Modern civilization as we know it could end if we can not find
ways to transform our current activities, and make them
sustainable. Our society must meet the needs of today’s activities
without sacrificing the well-being of future generations. This is
the responsibility of all citizens in all sectors, but IT plays a
critical role which must be addressed. Being able to recognize and
promote sustainable activities while providing research in
sustainable IT options ultimately creates significant opportunities
for green jobs in the IT sector. These jobs cannot be outsourced to
distant lands. Green jobs represent opportunities created for
workers in the homeland while enabling economic growth,
reducing energy dependence, and improving the health of the
populace. In the end, these green choices create an opportunity for
students to align themselves with meaningful life goals that
strengthen communities and the country as well.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Bentley, R.W. (2002). Global Oil & Gas Depletion: An
Overview. Energy Policy, 30(3), Feb 2002, 189-205.

[2] Capra, F. (1982). The Turning Point: A New Vision of
Reality. Futurist, 16(6), Dec 1982, 19-24.
[3] Chen, M.P., Chen, J.K., Murata, K., Nakahara, M., and
Harada, K. (2001). Surge Analysis of Induction Heating
Power Supply with PLL. IEEE Transactions on Power
Electronics, 16(5), September 2001, 702-709.
[4] Crawley, D.B., Hand, J.W., Kummert, M., and Griffith,
B.T. (2008). Contrasting the capabilities of building
energy performance simulation programs. Building and
Environment, 43(4), April 2008, 661-673.
[5] Duncan, R. (1996). The Olduvai Theory: Sliding Towards
a Post-Industrial Stone Age. Obtained from
http://www.dieoff.org/page125.htm on 11/18/2008.
[6] Foster, I., and Kesselman, C. (2004). The Grid: Blueprint
for a New Computing Infrastructure. Morgan Kaufmann,
2004.
[7] Google Commitment to Sustainable Computing. (2008).
Obtained from
http://www.google.com/corporate/datacenters/serverretirement.html on November 30, 2008.
[8] Houghton, J.T., Jenkins, G.J., and Ephraums, J.J. (1990).
Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
[9] Langdon, P.G., Barber, K.E., and Lomas-Clarke, S.H.
(2004). Reconstructing Climate and Environmental
Change in Northern England Through Chironomid and
Pollen Analysis: Evidence from Talkin Tarn, Cumbra.
Journal of Paleolimnology, 32 (2), 197-213.
[10] Levis, P., and Culler, D. (2002). Mate: a tiny virtual
machine for sensor networks. ACM SIGOPS Operating,
Systems Review, 36(5), December 2002, 85-95.
[11] Magnani, F., Mencuccini, M., Borghetti, M., Berbigier, P.,
Berninger, F., Delzon, S., Grelle, A., Hari, P., Jarvis, P.G.,
Kolari, P., Kowalski, A.S., Lankreijer, H., Law, B.E.,
Lindroth, A., Loustau, D., Manca, G., Moncrieff, J.B.,
Rayment, M., Tedeschi, V., Valentini, R., & Grace, J.
(2007). The Human Footprint in the Carbon Cycle of
Temperate and Boreal Forests. Nature, 447, June 2007,
[12] Massoud Amin, S. and Wollenberg, B.F. (2005). Toward a
Smart Grid: Power Delivery for the 21st Century. IEEE
Power and Energy Magazine, 3(5), September-October
2005, 34-41.

[13] Mitchell, J.F.B., Johns, T.C., Gregory, J.M., Tett, S.F.B.
(1995). Climate Response to Increasing Levels of
Greenhouse Gases and Sulphate Aerosols. Nature, 376,
August 1995, 501-504.
[14] Petit, J.R., Jouzel, J., Raynaud, D., Barkov, N.I., Barnola,
J.M., Basile, I., Bender, B.M., Chappellaz, J., David, M.,
Delaygue, G., Delmotte, M., Kotlyakov, V.M., Legrand,
M., Lipenkov, V.Y., Lorius, C., Pepin, L., Ritz, C.,
Saltzman, E., and Stievenard, M. (1999). Climate and
Atmospheric History of the Past 420,000 Years from the
Vostok Ice Core, Antarctica. Nature, 399, 429-436.
[15] Rigney, D. (2001). The Metaphorical Society: An
Invitation to Social Theory. Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, Inc.
[16] Royer, D.L., Berner, R.A., Park J. (2007). Climate
Sensitivity Constrained by CO2 Concentrations Over the
Past 420 Million Years. Nature, 446 (7135), 530-532.
[17] Shankland, S. (2008). Google Spotlights Data Center Inner
Workings. CNet News Blog, posted on May 30, 2008.
Obtained from
http://news.cnet.com/newsblog/?keyword=%22BigTable
%22 on November 30, 2008.
[18] Stern, D.I., Common, M.S., and Barbier, E.B. (1996).
Economic Growth and Environment Degradation: The
Environmental Kuznets Curve and Sustainable
Development. World Development, 24(7), July 1996,
1151-1160.
[19] US Global Change Research Program. (2005). Supporting
Document for the URSI While Paper on Solar Power
Satellite Systems. URSI Inter-Commission Working
Group on SPS, November 2005. Obtained from
http://www.ss.ncu.edu.tw/~ursi/record/WP_SPS_supdoc_0
51129.pdf on November 30, 2008.
[20] Warner, M.J., Bullister, J.L., Wisegarver, D.P., Gammon,
R.H., and Weiss, R.F. (1996). Basin-wide distributions of
chlorofluorocarbons CFC-11 and CFC-12 in the North
Pacific: 1985-1989. Journal of geophysical research, 101,
20525-20542.
[21] Welbergen, J.A., Klose, S.M., Markus, N., and Eby, P.
(2008). Climate Change and the Effects of Temperature
Extremes on Australian Flying-Foxes. Proceedings of The
Royal Society, 275 (1633), 419-425.

