Living In the KnowlEdge Society (LIKES) Initiative and
iSchools’ Focus on the Information Field
Poster Proposal
Seungwon Yang
Edward A. Fox

Wingyan Chung

Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA USA
+1 540-231-5113

Department of Operations and Management
Information Systems
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA USA
+1 408-554-4329

{seungwon, fox}@vt.edu

wchung@scu.edu

ABSTRACT
In this poster, we describe the similarities between the Living In
the KnowlEdge Society (LIKES) project and iSchools – both
focus on the information field. This might lead to future
collaborations between the two. One of the LIKES objectives is
to spread computational thinking, fundamental CS/IT paradigms,
key computing concepts and ICT paradigms across the
Knowledge Society. This is analogous to iSchools’ vision of
education for thorough understanding of information, IT and their
applications. In the previous three LIKES workshops, participants
from various disciplines had an intense discussion about grand
challenges to incorporate computing/IT in their disciplines. All
iSchools have courses that teach computing and informationrelated topics. If those courses can be expanded for other noncomputing disciplines on their campuses with support from
experiences of LIKES, it would further empower professionals in
the iField.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.2 [Computing Milieux]: Computer and information science
education
K.4.m [Computers and Society]: Miscellaneous

General Terms
Design, Experimentation.

Keywords

to zoology [1].” Ron Larsen, Dean of the University of
Pittsburgh's School of Information Sciences, emphasizes the
importance of ‘totality,’ which is to integrate information in
different disciplines, with technology in society, when educating
students [3]. As with LIKES, iSchools often aim to reach out to
all parts of their campuses, to broaden the impact of their
education, research, and service programs.

2. LIKES VISION and iSCHOOLS
LIKES was launched in 2007, as part of NSF’s CPATH program
to transform computing education at the undergraduate level [5].
While curricular improvements are often appropriate, it is
particularly urgent that changes be made in computing-related
education efforts, since there have been steep declines in the
number and diversity of those studying in these areas. While
information proliferates at an accelerating rate, and technologies
emerge ubiquitously to help with the management of information
and knowledge, fewer college graduates choose to major in
computer science and information systems disciplines. To address
the potential lack of adequate workforce for the knowledge
society, the LIKES project tries to transform computing education
to meet the challenges ahead.
In the first two years of LIKES, four universities – North Carolina
A&T, Santa Clara University, Villanova University, and Virginia
Tech – have been collaborating to prepare students to have an
active role in the knowledge society. The goals and objectives of
the LIKES project [2] are as follows:
•

Goal 1: Transform computing education so graduates
can help build systems, services, tools, or new
paradigms for the Knowledge Society.

•

Goal 2: Establish collaboration between computing
educators and all other disciplines to support educating
the next-generation of knowledge society builders.

•

Objective 1: Ensure that all interested undergraduates
are prepared for living in the emerging Knowledge
Society of the 21st Century.

•

Objective 2: Spread computational thinking,
fundamental CS/IT paradigms, key computing concepts,
and ICT paradigms across the Knowledge Society.

iSchool,
knowledge
society,
undergraduate education,
interdisciplinary collaboration, computing, information

1. INTRODUCTION
As iSchools try to equip college graduates with skills and
knowledge to work in the Information Field (iField [4]), the
Living In the KnowlEdge Society (LIKES) Community Building
project [2] focuses broadly on preparing these graduates to live in,
and to build, the emerging knowledge society of the 21st century.
We expect that LIKES graduates will connect naturally with the
iField, and we hope for more synergy between the two initiatives.
iSchools attempt to immerse people in the iField, which is “at the
heart of everything that individuals, organizations, and societies
need in order to advance any area of human endeavor, from acting

There is a strong synergy between our efforts and those of
iSchools. In particular, Objective 2 has a close connection. For
example, an excerpt from ‘What Are iSchools?’ [1] mentions, “…

This expertise must include understanding of the uses and users of
information, as well as information technologies and their
application.” Another example would be a course, Programming
for Chemical and Life Science Informatics, which is provided by
the School of Informatics at Indiana University. The course title
shows that a key computing concept (programming) is
incorporated in other disciplines (Chemistry and Life Sciences).
If more courses similar to the aforementioned could be developed
through collaboration between computing and non-computing
disciplines, it will be analogous to Goal 2.

web architecture. Figure 1 has computing topics, which are taught
in more than two iSchools. Other topics are present in Table 1.
iSchool curricula often lead to coverage of many computingrelated concepts, so these schools might be able to spread those
concepts, as well as information-related concepts, to other
disciplines on their campuses. That would further empower
professionals in the iField.
Table 1. Other computing topics taught in iSchools (each one
is taught in one iSchool)
architectures

machine learning

broadband wireless tech.

multimedia systems

classification systems

music information processing

communication protocols

network system admin.

computational informatics

networked computing

computer architecture

networking and internet tech.

computer concepts

programming

computer design

programming languages

computer-mediated comm.

rapid prototyping and eval.

cyber security

recommender systems

data compression

semantic web

data modeling

social computing

data visualization

software development

design of complex web sites

software foundations

digital government

software systems

e-government

statistics and data analysis

expert systems

text mining

hypermedia education

video game design

indexing and abstracting sys.

wireless interactive comm.

interactive system design

XML

interoperability issues

3. LESSONS LEARNED AND
CHALLENGES

Figure 1. Computing concepts taught in iSchools (concepts
presented here are taught in more than two iSchools)
Although the number of courses varies, all iSchools provide
courses that teach computing concepts as well as informationrelated topics. Frequently, there is coverage of computing topics
like: database management systems, programming, designing
computing applications, human-computer interaction, security,
computer-mediated communication, distributed computing, and

In the three previous LIKES workshops, there was intensive
discussion of computing concepts, as well as their application in
different disciplines, such as geography, history, music, biology,
architecture, physics, chemistry, mathematics, etc. We found that
students of these disciplines all benefit from learning computing
concepts and more needs to be done to integrate these concepts
into their curricula. Having recognized that, we have launched or
revised new programs and courses in each of our four sites. At
Viginia Tech, a new pathway called “LIKES” was introduced to
the undergraduate general education curriculum. At Santa Clara
University, a new course titled “Information Technology,
Business, and Society” has been proposed as a required course of
the 2009 new undergraduate core curriculum. At NCA&T, a new
program named “Introduction to Web Science” is being
developed. At Villanova University, a new course called “The
Laptop Instrument” was launched to combine computer science
and music disciplines. The fourth LIKES workshop is scheduled

for March 2009 at Villanova University. All of the participants
have interest in achieving the LIKES goals and objectives. Yet,
much work is needed. Some of the challenges identified at the
workshops include:
•

Archiving limitations (especially in subjects such as
history)

•

Deep understanding and ability to match abstractions
with problems in various contexts through
modeling/using

have been learned to date. Some of those might be directly
applicable at iSchools, or help in iSchool outreach activities.
It is our belief that we need knowledge in both computing as
well as information areas to understand deeply and get prepared
for the emerging Knowledge Society or iField. We look forward
to working together with interested iSchools.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project was funded by the NSF grant nos. CCF-0722259,
0722276, 0722289 and 0752865.

•

Enticing faculty to incorporate computational thinking
and to collaborate with each other (especially in the arts
and humanities)

•

Information literacy and critical thinking regarding
technology

•

[1] iSchools Caucus. (2008). Who are the iSchools? Retrieved
November 27, 2008, from http://www. .org/oc/ .html.

Lack of research support (e.g., funding, etc.)

•

Limitations in software tools and their use –
visualization/simulation for large classes, lack of tools
for specific purposes, disconnect between humanity’s
needs and the developers of the tools (making usable
tools)

[2] The Living In the KnowlEdge Society Project homepage.
Retrieved November 27, 2008, from
http://www.livingknowledgesociety.org.

•

Moving from massive amount of data to hypothesis
generation to testing

•

Preparing students for scholarship and work in
collaborative environments

•

Spreading LIKES to other disciplines and implementing
LIKES processes in terms of maintainability (e.g.,
incorporation of new computing concepts dynamically –
supercomputing/grid computing/cloud computing)

4. CONCLUSION
Since the LIKES project has a strong synergy with the building of
the iField, we believe that a discussion between the LIKES team
and i-Conference attendees would beneficially impact both the
efforts of LIKES and the iSchools. Our poster will highlight our
common interests, challenges, and plans. The poster also will
detail accomplishments at the four LIKES sites, and what lessons

REFERENCES

[3] An Interview with Ron Larson about iSchools, presented by
CNI (2005). Retrieved November 27, 2008, from
http://connect.educause.edu/blog/mpasiewicz/aninterviewwit
hronlarsena/1717?t.
[4] Mal Schwartz. (2008). Group of Leading Colleges Launch
Major Effort to Put The Information Field “On The Map”,
press release from MBS Associates, Montrose, NY.
Retrieved November 28, 2008 from
http://www.mbsa.info/resources/Putting%20iField%20on%2
0the%20Map%20Announcement%20081407%20final.pdf.
[5] NSF. (2006). CISE Pathways to Revitalized Undergraduate
Computing Education (CPATH). US National Science
Foundation Program Solicitation NSF 06-608. Arlington,
VA. Retrieved 2006-2006 from
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2006/nsf06608/nsf06608.htm

