Local-Global: Reconciling
Mismatched Ontologies in
Development Information Systems1
Jessica Seddon Wallack2
Ramesh Srinivasan3

Abstract
This paper extends pre-existing digital divide
conceptualizations to further investigate the
important issue of mismatches between the ontologies
of state-created information systems and local
communities’ representation of their contexts.
Comparability of data across time and place, as well
as compatibility of data with state administrative
needs come at a cost of information loss about the
setting and individuals that policymakers are trying
to impact. We argue that the reconciliation of
community and state logics and framings is critical
for effective engagement with communities as well as
formulation and implementation of development
policies. We suggest several paths toward
overcoming mismatched ontologies: education and
communications strategies to enable communities
and states to translate across ontologies and fill in
significant
gaps;
re-assignment
of
policy
responsibilities to minimize information loss; and
several mechanisms that would enable communities
to be directly and productively engaged in developing
shared ontologies.

1. Introduction
“Waterlogging” is a perennial complaint in cities
in Karnataka, India. A few hours of rain can turn a
dry street to a rushing torrent, while a burst pipe or a
blocked drain can turn a pedestrian crossing into a
treacherous lake. Local newspapers are full of photos,
1

Please note that the formal publisher of this paper
is via the HICSS 2009 conference proceedings. This
I-Conference paper is a copy of the above and the
HICSS citation should be used for this paper.
2

Director, Ctr for Development Finance, Institute for
Financial Management and Research, Chennai, India
& Research Scholar, Global Information Industry
Center, UC San Diego, California.
3
Assistant Professor, Department of Information
Studies, UC Los Angeles.

bus stops and public places full of discussion. Yet
data on public grievances in 57 cities over nearly two
years (2005-2007) contains only 203 records of
“waterlogging” – instead there are recorded incidents
of storm drains in need of desilting, storm drains in
need of repair, leaking pipes, and choked
underground drains. These are the various categories
that citizens can choose from to report the puddles –
which may very well look the same regardless of
origin - via cities’ Public Grievance and Redressal
Systems. [73] No individual type of complaint
accounts for more than 9% of complaints (most types
are much less frequent), but the total of all
complaints related to puddles – the actual thing that
citizens can see and complain about – comes to 26%.
Bus stop conversations about waterlogging and
reported complaints about pipes and drains refer to
the same occurrence. Yet the community’s
understanding of the situation and the Karnataka
government’s record of the event label, catalogue,
and interpret the event in divergent manners. The first
characterization represents local knowledge, the
picture that communities hold of the event, its
significance, and its possible solutions. The person
affected by waterlogging contextualizes it directly
into existing activities and categories of their
community. The second ‘sees like a state’ [52]: the
problem is absorbed and recorded according to the
logic of administrative efficiency and/or its policy
ramifications. The designated categories list
efficiently routes complaints to the concerned
departments, but it may also fragment and obscure
citizens’ concerns.
This example, we believe, is emblematic of a key
attribute of the digital divide: mismatched ontologies
that impede communities’ ability to impart and
communicate information and states’ ability to fully
understand the territories they govern. Communities
and states (we use the term generically to refer to
subnational, national, and international governing
institutions) represent the realities around them
through distinct ontologies, or systems of categories
and their interrelations by which groups order and
manage information about the people, places, things,
and events around them.
On the one hand, ontologies provide an essential
shared infrastructure for individuals to function as a
group. Communities may in fact form and self-define
around shared ontologies, constructed and reconstructed fluidly [57] through shared social and
cultural activities and the ever-changing lived
experiences of their members. Ontologies work to
create and enact worldviews within the social group
and situate knowledge [63,64] within the
organizational or community setting.

This is as true for states’ ontologies as it is for
community ontologies. State data systems are the
infrastructure of administration: the structured,
comparable information about the area under
jurisdiction enables resources to be identified and
taxed, needs to be assessed, and returns on public
expenditure or investment to be monitored.
Policymakers seeking to direct resources to “the
poor” and monitor the impact, for example, need to
have figures that enable comparisons of poverty
across their territory and over time even if the local
perceptions of poverty vary. Current standards for
“good
policy,”
including
evidence-based
decisionmaking and monitorability of policies also
implicitly rely on meta ontologies’ ability to produce
the kind of quantitative indicators and large-scale
datasets required for “objective” evaluation of
performance and research that meets current
standards for evidence of effectiveness. See
www.paris21.org for an example of an influential
group of development agency’s call for this type of
information as a step toward improved policymaking.
Nevertheless, ontologies also act as objects that
create and negotiate boundaries between groups
[9,61]. The state ‘meta ontology’ sheds much of the
local context in order to ensure tractable management
for policy purposes including taxation, defense,
provision of infrastructure and service, and economic
management[76,1,52]. This tractability comes at the
cost of information loss due to mismatched
ontologies. While any group’s ontology is unlikely to
match that of every individual within the group, the
extent of mismatch tends to increase with the scale of
the group and the differences between the purpose of
individual and group ontologies. Note that our use of
ontology does not imply a reified nor exoticized
model of ‘pastness’ or ‘locality’ that ignores flows of
interaction that shape communities over time [2], but
merely implies a distinction between groups’ mental
maps of their surroundings.
We argue that states cannot ensure the outcomes
that they seek if their policies are targeting a skewed
picture of communities’ reality. Even the most
benign development-seeking state may go awry if its
actions are guided by its own ontology and
indicators, while levels of and progress toward
development are individual or at most communityspecific concepts.
This paper characterizes an important and
overlooked element of the digital divide: information
loss due to mismatch between community ontologies
and ‘meta ontologies.’ We argue that the digital
divide may be usefully framed around a model of
communication, of reconciliation of ontological
frameworks that enables information flow between

communities and states. The divide is not strictly
digital since the issues with mismatched ontologies
we elaborate on below would occur between any
small and large scale ontology, but it has been
exacerbated as ICTs designed around state metaontologies are increasingly deployed to impact
development in diverse communities. This view
extends the digital divide literature focused on
barriers between infrastructure and technology access
[13, 16, 17, 18, 12, 28].
This discussion also extends research on literacy
and contextual information uses [65, 56, 38, 7, 31] to
offer an expanded argument for the importance of
systems and institutional mechanisms that enable
effective
communication
between
differing
ontologies. Mismatched ontologies contribute to: (a)
ineffective delivery of information services to
communities; (b) insufficient participation and
interaction with local communities; and importantly,
and (c) ‘information loss’ that affects states’ abilities
to effectively deliver goods, services, and
development-supporting interventions. Much cited
research has pointed to the issues within (a) and (b).
This paper focuses on (c), to make the argument that
the issue of mismatched ontologies is a lose-lose
proposition for communities and states.
The gap between community and meta ontologies
is not necessarily purposeful, but rather is often a
symptom of the fundamental difficulty of
incorporating local, contextualized knowledge into
large
scale,
comparable-across-time-and-place
datasets. We recognize that states must be able to
compare and aggregate across communities so that
resources can be allocated, scalable policies can be
developed, and effectiveness of any interventions
evaluated. Research on development demands data
that are comparable across communities and time and
specifically collected to clarify hypothesize
categories and relationships. Yet at the same time this
aggregation leads to information loss, not just in
terms of overlooked entities but more importantly in
overlooked or misjudged semantic relationships
between these entities.
Finally, we also propose some ways to mitigate
the information loss by identifying ways in which
systems and technologies can collect and represent
information meaningfully for communities and states
alike, reconciling mismatched ontologies. These
types of solutions necessitate equitable forms of
access, however, and cannot resolve all aspects of
ontology mismatch. Institutional and policy design
may also need to be reconsidered to decentralize
more decision making in light of the costs of
information loss associated with larger-scale meta
ontologies.

We devote the next section of this paper to
underscore the relevance of ontologies, characterize
information loss with further specificity, and outline
some consequences of information loss in the
creation of state meta ontologies. The third section
proposes some mechanisms of reconciliation and
alleviation of the mismatch. The final section
concludes with a discussion of a broader research
agenda on these issues.

2. The power of ontologies, the problem of
information loss
Ontologies
represent
reality,
but
this
representation of information may in turn become the
basis for actions that in turn shape reality. The
actions may be shaped in response to ontologies and
aimed at problems defined by ontologies, but their
impacts depend on the actual reality rather than the
representation. Any actor’s effectiveness in achieving
their goals thus depends on the quality and
completeness of their ontology. Incomplete or
inadequate state meta ontologies are especially
problematic because of the power that states’ actions
have to affect communities.
The problem is especially pervasive for economic
development policy, in which states’ goals are (at
least normatively) defined in terms of individuals’
utility, or sense of wellbeing. Some of the most
prominent formulations of “development” measure
progress in terms of achievements that only make
sense with reference to individuals’ or communities’
ontologies. Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen’s concept of
“development as freedom,” [54] for example, argues
that development consists of ensuring that people
have the capability to do and be what they value. The
notion of “human development” considers health and
access to knowledge, both of which are best assessed
by the individual, to be part of development along
with income. (The concept has been implemented in
practice [68] with simplistic measures of observable
levels of health, educational attainment, and gross
domestic product per capita, but that is another
matter.) Economics has traditionally resolved the
tension between the need to measure wellbeing in
order to design and assess policies and the
acknowledgement that wellbeing is a subjective
concept dependant on an individual’s worldview by
assuming a representative ‘rational’ individual with a
well-defined and known ontology, but the increasing
presence of the “economics of happiness” [22] and
“behavioral economics” [11] in mainstream journals
and top academic venues suggests that the
compromise is fraying. States’ attempts to promote

“development” are thus limited by the information
loss between the community ontologies that define
development and meta ontologies that guide their
actions.
More concrete consequences of information loss
can be seen in a variety of policy areas. Urban
planning, for example, seeks to devise guidelines to
ensure that communities have desirable places to live,
work, and play [27]; but often ends up creating empty
monstrosities such as Brasilia’s Plaza of the Three
Powers [48] or dysfunctional living spaces the
destroy rather than support community. The official
guidelines are often ignored by communities
operating on their own principles of order, leading to
inevitable conflicts between states and citizens who
essentially seek the same outcomes [44, 72]. Many
failed efforts to provide infrastructure and services
can be traced to similar misunderstandings.
Affordable drinking water projects have been
rejected by communities because their pricing models
fail to recognize that while communities are willing
to pay for services such as water purification or water
delivery, they see the water itself as a right [44].
Roads have been built and left unused because they
failed to connect places of local import. Free
schooling has failed to educate half of some areas’
population because classroom design did not include
separate toilets for girls [44]. Technologies that
could ostensibly improve living conditions and
economic opportunities have been rejected because
they were inconvenient for some other community
practice: many rural Indian households continue to
cook over smoky indoor fires while free cleanburning stoves distributed by government programs
go unused because they did not accommodate locally
used cooking pots or could not be used to produce
local specialties. Public IT kiosks sit idle even as the
benefits of IT skills and access become clearer. [70]
The fate of the clean-burning cook stoves and the
IT kiosks is hardly surprising to students of “ICT for
Development.” Significant research has revealed that
an understanding of community ontologies,
particularly in the context of information systems and
technologies, is fundamental to the ability of new
innovations to insert themselves sustainably within
the lives of local communities [58,59,60].
There is thus a far-reaching and fundamental
policymaking problem due to the inadequate meta
ontologies that states often rely on. We now turn to
be more specific about nature of the information loss
between community and meta ontologies. First, what,
specifically, is the “information loss” that leads to
inadequate meta ontologies? Second, how does it
arise and why is it perpetuated? Understanding a
problem is the first step toward devising a solution.

We characterize information loss as a
consequence of mismatches between components of
community and meta ontologies. It thus has various
interlinked dimensions: entities that are included in
one ontology but excluded from another; categories
that create different groupings of these entities for
communities and for states; discrepancies between
the attributes that are recorded and attached to
entities or categories; divergence in the recognized
potential changes in categories or attributes;
differences among the relations used to link entities
or categories in each ontology; and variations (and
perhaps contradictions) in the restrictions and rules
that define allowable inputs and inferences about the
world represented by the ontology. (We are
formalizing this notion of information loss and its
implications for the design of technology to cross the
digital divide in concurrent work as it is beyond the
scope of this paper.)
Most of these dimensions of information loss
could, in principle, be resolved at some cost. Any
object, attribute, category, or relation included within
a local ontology could be included in a meta
ontology. Governments often collect data on food
consumption to measure poverty; they could (and
sometimes do) just as well collect data on clothing,
appliance ownership, extent of private living space,
and other ways in which communities understand
poverty. Censuses often group individuals as
employed or unemployed, there is no reason that they
could not also include categories for happily
employed and unhappily employed as well.
Governments often base the relations in their
ontologies on those derived by the scientific method;
there is no reason that they could not also incorporate
folkloric relations that guide community perceptions.
The only fundamental obstacles to eliminating
information loss between ontologies stem from
potential conflicts between rules and restrictions in
different ontologies and disagreement over the nature
of events that determine transitions in attributes or
objects.
Why would states purposely create, rely on, and
perpetuate ontologies that are inadequate for
characterizing the terrain they administer and the
goals they seek to achieve? The political economy
literature offers various explanations for the nature of
states’ logical frameworks and resulting policies. [21]
Some
authors
focus
on
ideology
or
scientific/academic reasoning (in development, for
example, the reigning schools of thought about how
growth happens) as the main influence ([14], for
example). Others characterize states’ logic as an
emergent property of the political interactions within
the institutional setting, as a function of whether

countries are democracies or autocracies, presidential
or parliamentary democracies, federal or unitary
states, for example [50, 19, 64]. The third main
school of thought sees states and their meta
ontologies as reflecting some aggregate summary of
citizens’ views and preferences as expressed at the
ballot box or through lobbying and “insider dealing.”
(See, for example [20] and the vast literature on
Public Choice that this work has inspired on voting,
or [34] on lobbyist networks.) We note that all but the
last involve forces that have no necessary linkage to
communities’ mental maps of their surroundings, and
the link between mechanisms for aggregation of
citizens’ preferences and community ontologies is
weak at best. Voting, rioting, and lobbying provide
limited opportunities for conveying information. The
limitations on how much information can feasibly be
aggregated through group decision making to
determine social choices have been formally and
extensively explored in social choice theory [3, 5].
We argue that states’ meta ontologies are also at
least in part a function of the logistics of their efforts
to collect data. Every explicit effort to document a
territory, such as a census, is based on particular
claims of how a community is to be measured, how
the boundaries of a community are to be determined,
what counts as an activity, and how these collected
data points are to be connected and compared [69,
62]. These claims may be motivated by politics [49,
32] or determined by administrative and
technological feasibility of data collection, storage,
and retrieval. Scott also shows that administrative
exigencies related to the division of the
responsibilities among and within bureaucratic
entities have been influential in determining data
collection norms [52]. (He also shows that
administrative norms have also driven policies to
forcibly alter reality to make it more ‘countable’:
assigning surnames, for example, or removing biodiversity enhancing and forest-sustaining underbrush
in order to better count trees useful for lumber and
shipbuilding.) Communities’ documentation efforts
may very well be driven by the same factors, but on a
local rather than cross-community scale so there is
little reason to expect intersection or reconciliation
between the statistical representations.
Once in place, state meta-ontologies tend to be
self-reinforcing or at least unlikely to converge with
community ontologies. States are one of the largest
sources of credible data on a variety of economic,
political, and social processes and outcomes. Their
collection and presentation of information determines
the ways in which empirical relationships can be
discovered, verified, proved, used for public debate.

Researchers and citizens are less able to challenge
the meta ontology when they cannot model and
demonstrate the validity of local restrictions,
practices, events, and entities according to
community ontologies. States’ dominant position in
the supply of data will likely change over time as the
costs of collection, compilation, storage, and
dissemination of community-produced data continue
to decline. But even then, states’ authority may
privilege conclusions drawn from “official” versus
non-state produced data.
Second, communities may be less willing to
interact with the state to provide data if they feel that
the way that this data is aggregated, presented, and
used has no connection to the questions that they
would like to ask. As one professional demographer
reports in personal communication with the author
“In surveys that I have handled … the resistance to
provide data was huge. Most respondents asked first,
‘What do I gain by all these?’ They did not believe
research could be productive for them” [55]. Nonresponse is a widespread problem for censuses and
other surveys [25].
Third, communities are less able to engage with
states to influence ontologies or information
contained in them when they do not find the starting
points intelligible. Notable research in Science and
Technology Studies [15, 72] has demonstrated that
without an approach that directly asks stakeholders to
collaboratively work to reflectively create data
models, often information systems end up
disorienting the groups at hand. Summary statistics
from the public grievance and redressal system
mentioned in the introduction, for example, shows
that citizens in some cities in Karnataka are very
bothered by “biomedical waste.” A closer look at the
(harder to aggregate and summarize) text of the
grievances shows that many people had selected the
“biomedical waste” category to actually refer to dead
pigs, dogs, and other animals [73].
Unintelligible or incomplete ontologies also
weaken the basis for collective action that may be
required to draw attention to citizens’ voices. This is
particularly the case for problems that tend to be
observed by individuals rather than groups. Citizens
are unlikely to band together and lobby for the state
to recognize and address sexual harassment, for
example, if each person affected has no idea that his
or her own experience is not unique because there are
no data on prevalence of cases.
This discussion, therefore, leaves us with some
important questions concerning the extent to which
sociotechnical systems and institutions optimize
between local sustainability and cross-community
scaleability? Or, is there a way in which community

activities can be viewed and monitored from the
birds-eye by the states while still preserving the local
nuances?

3. Bridging local and global
We close this paper by reflecting on several ways
in which information loss can be reduced. This
section offers three possibilities, each the basis of
ongoing research:
1) Developing collaborative and inclusive
ontologies.
Systems
that
engage
communities to dynamically model their
relationship to the information they are
provided, around local categories, and
fluid relationships between these, have
been used sustainably and innovatively in
cross-cultural local community contexts
[e.g; 37, 47, 38]
2) Educational and communications strategies
to empower and encourage communities to
interpret state-provided data and provide
feedback
including
alternative
representations
of
their
contextual
knowledge into the ontology underlying
official “development data.”
3) Considering motivations for authorship and
therefore bridging the above two
categories.

3.1. Collaborative and inclusive ontologies
Socio-technical systems can enable communities
to occupy a variety of roles, falling on a spectrum
from passive consumer to co-designer and co-creator,
to collaborate in creating ontologies. Moreover, in
relevant cases, communities can be involved in
actually developing, in decentralized manners, their
own fluid ontologies, by being exposed to the raw
information behind the system and perhaps through
semi-automated models, such as rating similarities
between entities and evaluating semi-automated
models, such as hierarchical clustering and
multidimensional scaling [56]. Fluid ontologies, in
their most localized form, involve content creators
and multiple stakeholders in the direct crafting of
categories and data representations so as to ensure
that the information they interact so as to ensure that
information is presented, retrieved, preserved, and
shared around relevant categorical and relational
attributes that are sensible to the community in
particular [57]. These stakeholders are presented with
adaptive and dynamic possibilites to continuously recraft such ontologies as their reflection of community

practices shifts over time. For example, a local
village community can access an information kiosk
of state services, rate the relative importance of each
of these within their own community, re-categorize
(via tags) services provided to follow local
vernaculars, draw semantic connections between
different services by attributing a connection with a
particular term, and blog by commenting or
submitting a video in response to something they
experience via the system. We believe that these
creative and local uses of tagging, rating, and other
types of Web 2.0 technologies present powerful
opportunities to adapt and edit a meta ontology and
reconcile it with local practices. Validating this
hypothesis is the subject of current research. We
believe that this approach can be inherently
collaborative, as it asks for reaction and re-crafting of
an ontology based around a type of conversation that
occurs between the policymaker/system and local
community members. These social web 2.0 type uses
can ask community members to submit their own
categories, comment on information they are
presented, and actively work with policymakers, even
if not in real time, to develop and identify adequate
ontologies that reconcile these different perspectives.
Designing more inclusive ontologies that can
record more objects and attributes, tag them as
belonging to any category any community wished to
include, link them to other objects, attributes, and
categories in any relationship any community cared
to define, and store all of this information for ready
retrieval, is an important challenge. We recognize
that for this to occur, new experiments and prototypes
need to be created that engage important work on
collaborative and inclusive ontologies conducted by
such scholars of information science, as Jens-Erik
Mai, Birger Hjorland, and others. Mai’s work on
pragmatic approaches toward determining ‘likeness’
in knowledge organization argues that classification
is fundamentally interpretive [40]. Instead, presenting
different ‘documents’ into the local social and
cultural context could enable them to be reflectively
classified based around the community’s own
pragmatics [39]. Likewise, Hjorland, across an
extensive body of work, has argued that “different
paradigms or conceptualizations in discourses should
be made visible in information repositories, and that
semantic tools should not just support the navigation
between topics but also views and interests. This
approach denounces an a priori ‘universalist’
approach toward defining how knowledge shoul be
organized, and instead decentralizes the project to
allow different discourses to be shared based around
multiple ontological viewpoints. Mai and Hjorland’s
arguments are well-taken, and remind us that the

question of localization in such systems is a social
and linguistic problem, rather than solely technical
[4], one that must necessarily involve local
communities to articulate their own vocabularies and
contextualize information in meaningful manners.
We are developing a field study to investigate
possibilities for building a larger scale information
sharing network with a foundation of collaborative
and inclusive ontologies centered on community
economic development initiatives.

3.2.
Education
Strategies

and

Communications

Meta ontologies that are more transparent and
communicable
through
relevant
forms
of
communication and outreach to communities may
also reduce the dynamics of divergence described in
Section 2. NGOs and in some cases states themselves
have filled the role of translating meta ontologies into
language more familiar to communities through
services such as literally translating from one
language to another or helping citizens to represent
their circumstances on forms for loans, benefits,
taxes, etc. While these are important “bridging”
services, they are not a full solution as the power to
build a bridge lies only with those who are
conversant in the meta ontology.
Technology and education could combine to
create a more inclusive solution in which
communities can reorder state-collected information
according to their local ontologies. Database design
and interface determine in part how communities can
interact with and reorganize raw data to retrieve the
objects and attributes they felt were important,
choose the categories to sort and compare, and select
the relationships they wished to use for ordering the
observations. “Numeracy” empowers citizens to take
advantage of these flexible modes of dissemination.
Citizens who are able understand statistics,
manipulate them, interpret and re-represent them are
better able to adjust data for their own needs as well
as communicate local reality to the state authorities
and point out gaps that the state data do not fill.
This approach to resolving information loss has
the potential to create its own form of digital divide,
however, as digital representation of information and
interactivity with the underlying data warehouse are
necessary. Users cannot manipulate data presented on
a printed page, for example, in the same way that
they can work with an excel spreadsheet or, better
yet, a database with opportunities to construct queries
to retrieve data. Users cannot readily visualize
information for quick comparisons and checks
without having GIS or some web-based applications.

It is far easier to assess the quality of city services if
one can look at the location of bus shelters on a city
map of bus routes than if one has to compare a list of
written addresses with a list of bus routes defined by
their origin and destination for example.

3.3. Motivation, Authorship, and Ownership
Scholars such as Clay Shirky who celebrate the
decentralized commonses formed via new mediat
technologies argue that motivation itself must be
considered when thinking about digital technologies
and their ability to enable new forms of knowledge
sharing and dissemination. The question of
motivation therefore is worth
considering,
particularly when focusing on the issue of incentive
that would engage communities to participate in
government administered technologies. A recently
completed study by Srinivasan focusing on the power
of video to shape community consensus building in
villges in Andhra Pradesh, India, has asserted that the
everyday social lives of individuals must be included
in the consideration of how digital technologies can
be deployed. The compelling videos that trigger new
forms of consensus building, confidence in decision
making, and more are videos made by individuals
about their everyday lives, following a narrative
structure that is relatable by community members
because it is grounded in the everyday and local. We
believe that considering the question of motivation is
significant and bridges the first two recommendations
by concurrently considering local ontologies and
outreach/education strategies. How to study
motivation shall help guide future collaborative
research.

4. Conclusions
This paper has identified a new form of divide
that has been exacerbated by the increasing reliance
on and use of information technology for growing
markets and states. We have argued that information
loss due to mismatch between community ontologies
and the meta ontologies that states act upon has
serious consequences for the efficacy of state
policies, especially those aimed at accelerating
development.
We are not the first to point out the defects of
centralized planning and the hubris of states.
Friedrick Hayek won the Nobel Prize in Economics
in 1974 for pointing out the value of local, practical
knowledge, some of the the pathologies of states’
approach to ‘scientific’ planning, and the need for

any functional system to maintain a space for people
to use their local, practical knowledge [29,30] .
The paper does offer a new perspective on this
long-recognized problem, however, by reconceptualizing information loss as a kind of
communication failure that can be increasingly
mitigated through technology as well as addressed
through institutional redesign to reallocate
decisionmaking authority and establish alternative
channels for communication. This conceptualization
of information loss from ontology mismatch offers a
new criteria for evaluating institutional design.
This paper represents a first step in a larger
conceptual and empirical research agenda that we are
working toward. First, this paper uses logic and
anecdotes to identify the information loss due to
mismatched ontologies as a potentially significant
challenge for development policymaking and a
priority for further research. We have not yet
rigorously established the extent of information loss
nor the financial or human costs of mismatched
ontologies. Our first step will be a meta-analysis of
existing studies: measurable discrepancies between
community understandings and the pictures portrayed
in policy-relevant official statistics have been studied
for various data series and settings [47, 6], but the
collective implications have not been studied.
Second, rigorously establishing the extent of
information loss and assessing the efficacy of
proposed solutions requires a measurement concept.
We are currently formalizing the concept of
information loss that we have introduced in this note.
We conceptualize information loss as occurring in
dimensions corresponding to mismatch between
various components of local and meta ontologies, but
we have yet to develop a sensible way to weight each
of these dimensions in any summary of information
loss. The effort to weigh the relative importance of
the various dimensions requires additional empirical
work.
Finally, practical progress in reducing information
loss ultimately relies on our ability to demonstrate the
impact of mismatched ontologies on success or
failure of specific policy initiatives. As discussed
above, states do not always have strong incentives to
adopt the kind of solutions that we suggest, especially
when the “problem” is murky and current notions of
“good policy” rely on the comparability and
monitorability than meta ontologies can deliver. We
have discussed cases of information loss and are
improving our ability to quantify it, but the next step
of linking information loss to economic or human
loss will be more challenging. It will be difficult to
conclusively disentangle mistaken assumptions or
understandings of development challenges from other

sources of policy failure, but we are optimistic that
some carefully selected cases developed as
theoretically-grounded analytic narratives [8] will
help us to tease out the effects of poor information
from the effects of institutions, ideology, and other
features of the decision making environment. We will
be collecting focus group information on public
sector decision making practices in various levels of
government in India in order to design these studies.

5. References
[1] Alonso, W. and P. Starr, eds. The Politics of
Numbers. Russell Sage Foundation, New York,
1987.
[2] Appadurai, Arjun. "Disjuncture and Difference in
the Global Cultural Economy." Modernity at
Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1996. 27-47.
[3] Arrow, K. Social Choice and Individual Values.
John Wiley & Sons, New York. 1951
[4] Atzeni, P. “Schema and Data Translation,” m/s,
2005.
[5] Austen-Smith, D., and J. Banks. Positive Political
Theory I. Michigan University Press, Ann Arbor,
MI, 1998.
[6] Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Chattopadhyay, R., and
J. Shapiro. “Targetting Efficiency: How Well
Can We Identify the Poor?” Institute for
Financial Management and Research Centre for
Micro Finance Working Paper Series, no. 21,
December 2007.
[7] Barzilay-Nahon, K. 2006. Gaps and Bits:
Conceptualizing Measurements for the Digital
Divide. The Information Society 22: 269-277.
[8] Bates, R.H.,Greif, A., and M. Levi. Analytic
Narratives. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1998
[9] Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Susan Leigh Star.
"How Things (Actor-Net)Work: Classification,
Magic and the Ubiquity of Standards."
Philosophia 25.3-4 (1996): 195.
[10] ---. Sorting Things Out: Classification and its
Consequences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1999.
[11] Camerer, C., Loewenstein, G., and M. Rabin.
Advances in Behavioral Economics. Princeton
University Press: Princeton, NJ, 2004.
[12] Chambers, Robert. 1994. Participatory Rural
Appraisal (PRA): Challenges, Potentials and
Paradigms. World Development 22(10): 14371454.
[13] Chen W., and B. Wellman. 2003. Charting and
Bridgind Digital Divides: Comparing Socioeconomic, Gender, Life Stage and Rural-Urban
Internet Access and Use in Eight Countries.
AMD Global Consumer Advisory Board (GSAB)

[14] Chibber, V. Locked in Place: State Building and
Late Industrialization in India. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2003.
[15] Christie,
Michael,
and
Helen
Verran.
"Using/Designing Digital Technologies of
Representation
in
Aboriginal
Australian
Knowledge Practices." Human Technology 3.2
(2007): 214-27.
[16] Compaine B.M. 2001. The digital divide : facing
a crisis or creating a myth? Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press
[17] DiMaggio P., E. Hargittai. 2001. From the
'Digital Divide' to Digital Inequality: Studying
Internet Use as Penetration Increases. Center for
Arts and Cultural Policy Studies, Princeton
University Working Paper #15
[18] DiMaggio P., Hargittai, Eszter, Celeste, Coral
and Shafer, Steven. 2004. Digital Inequality:
From Unequal Access to Differentiated Use. In K
Neckerman (Ed.), Social Inequality: 355-400.
Russell Sage Foundation: New York
[19] Dixit, A. The Making of Economic Policy: A
Transactions Cost Perspective. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1996.
[20] Downs, A. An Economic Theory of Democracy.
Harper Brothers: New York, 1957.
[21] Evans, P., Rueschmeyer, D., and T. Skocpol, eds.
Bringing the State Back In. Cambridge
University Press, New York, 1985.
[22] Graham, C. “The Economics of Happiness:
Insights on Globalization from a Novel
Approach,” World Economics, v.6, No.3, JulySeptember 2005.
[23] __ “Insights on Development from the
Economics of Happiness,” World Bank Research
Observer, 20(2), 2005:201-231.
[24] Grindle, M. Going Local: Decentralization,
Democratization, and the Promise of Good
Governance.
Princeton
University
Press,
Princeton, 2007.
[25] Groves, R., Dillman, D., Eltidge, J., and R. Little.
Survey Nonresponse. John Wiley and Sons, New
York, 2001.
[26] Hargittai E. 1999. Weaving the Western Web:
Explaining Differences in Internet Connectivity
Among OECD Countries. Telecommunications
Policy 23(10/11): 701-718
[27] Hall, Peter. Cities of Tomorrow. Blackwell
Publishing, Boston, 2002.
[28] Hargittai E. 2002. Second-Level Digital Divide:
Differences in People's Online Skills.First
Monday
7(4).
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_4/hargittai/
[29] Hayek, F. “The Use of Knowledge in Society,”
American Economic Review, XXXV, No. 4;
September, 1945, pp. 519-30.
[30] Hayek, F. “The Pretence of Knowledge,” in
Lindbeck, A., ed Nobel Lectures, Economics
1969-1980, World Scientific Publishing Co.,
Singapore, 1992

[31] Heeks, R. 1999. Information and communication
technologies,
poverty,
and
development.
Development Informatics Working Paper Series,
Institute
for
Development
Policy
and
Management. University of Manchester.
[32] Herrera, Y. Imagined Economies: The Sources of
Russian Regionalism. Cambridge University
Press, New York, 2005.
[33] Herz, B., & G. Sperling. Evidence and policies
from the developing world: What works in girls'
education. Executive summary. Council on
Foreign Relations, New York, 2004.
[34] Hjørland, Birger (2007) Semantics and
Knowledge Organization. Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology 41:367 405.
[35] Hjørland, Birger (2004) Theory of knowledge
organization and the feasibility of universal
solutions. Presented at the Eighth International
ISKO Conference, London, July 13-16, 2004.
[36] Jenkins, R. Democratic Politics and Economic
Reform in India. Cambridge University Press,
New York, 1999.
[37] Kanungo, S. 2004. On the emancipatory role of
rural
information
systems.
Information
Technology and People. 17(4): 407-422.
[38] Loegelin,
M.
1992.
Interformation
et
development: etude synthetique des lignes de
force du discourse universitaire. Institut
Universitaire de Technologie B, Department
Carrieres
de
l’information
et
del
al
communication, Universite de Bourdeaux.
[39] Mai, J-E. "Likeness: A Pragmatic Approach" In
Dynamism and Stability in Knowledge
Organization.
Proceedings of the Sixth
International ISKO Conference. Advances in
Knowledge Organization, 7: 23-27, 2000.
[40] Mai, J-E. "The Concept of Subject: On Problems
in Indexing" In Knowledge Organization for
Information Retrieval. Proceedings of the 6th
International Study Conference on Classification
Research. 6: 60-67, 1997.
[41] Mas-Colell, A., Whinston,M., and J.Green.
Microeconomic Theory. Oxford University Press,
New York, 1995.
[42] Madon, S. and Sahay, S. 2002. An Informationbased Model of NGO-mediation for the
Empowerment of Slum Dwellers in Bangalore.
The Information Society:18(1): 13-20.
[43] McCubbins, M., and T. Schwartz. “Congressional
Oversight Overlooked: Police Patrols vs. Fire
Alarms,” American Journal of Political Science,
February 1984.
[44] McKenzie, D., and D. Mookherjee. “Distributive
Impact of Privatization in Latin America: An
Overview of Evidence from Four Countries,”
Economia, vol. 3, no. 2, Spring 2003, pp. 161218.
[45] Menou, M.J. 1985. An overview of social
measures of information. Journal of the American

[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]

[50]
[51]

[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]

[57]
[58]

[59]
[60]
[61]

[62]
[63]

Society of Information Science and Technology.
36(3): 169-177.
Oates, W. “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 1999, 37, (3),
1120-1149
Olken, B. “Revealed Community Equivalence
Scales,” Journal of Public Economics 89 (2005):
545-566.
Neuwirth, R., Shadow Cities: A Billion Squatters,
Routledge, London, 2006.
Perlman, M., “Political Purpose and National
Accounts,” in Alonso, W. and P. Starr, eds. The
Politics of Numbers, Russel Sage Foundation,
New York, 1987.
Persson, T. “Do Institutions Shape Economic
Policy?” Econometrica, v.70, no.3, 2002.
Puri, S.K. and Sahay, S. 2003. Participation
through communicative action: A case study of
GIS for addressing land/water management in
India. Information Technology for Development.
vol 10: 179-199.
Scott, J. Seeing Like a State: How Certain
Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have
Failed. Yale University Press, New Haven, 1998.
Seely-Brown, John. and S. Duguid. The Social
Life of Information. Harvard Business Press,
Cambridge, 2002
Sen, A. Development as Freedom. Oxford
University Press, New York, 1999.
Somasundaram, L. personal correspondence,
Chennai, India, December 20, 2007.
Srinivasan, R., Pepe, A., and Rodriguez, M.
“Eliciting Cultural Ontologies: A comparison
between Hierarchical Clustering Methods and
Participatory Design Processes.”, under review.
Srinivasan, Ramesh, and Jeffrey Huang. "Fluid
Ontologies for Digital Museums." International
Journal of Digital Libraries.5 (2005): 193-204. .
Srinivasan,
Ramesh.
"Ethnomethodological
Architectures: Information Systems Driven by
Cultural and Community Visions." Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology 5.5 (2007): 723-33.
---.
"Indigenous,
Ethnic
and
Cultural
Articulations of New Media." International
Journal of Cultural Studies 9.4 (2006): 497-518.
---. "Where Community Voice and Information
Society Intersect." The Information Society 22
(2006): 355-65.
Star, Susan Leigh, and James R. Griesemer.
"Institutional Ecology, 'Translations' and
Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in
Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 190739." Social Studies of Science 19 (1989): 387420.
Starr, P, “The Sociology of Official Statistics,”
Suchman,
Lucy
A.
Human-Machine
Reconfigurations: Plans and Situated Actions.
2nd ed. ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2006.

[64] ---. "Located Accountabilities in Technology
Production."
Scandanavian
Journal
of
Information Systems 14.2 (2002): 91-105.
[65] Stepan, A. State and Society: Peru in
Comparative Perspective. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, 1978.
[66] Turban, E., Aronson, J., Lian, T., Sharda, R.
Decision Support and Business Intelligence.
Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 2006 (8th Edition)
[67] Ulman, J. Future Tendencies in Computer
Science, Control and Applied Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1992.
[68] United Nations Human Development Report.
http://hdr.undp.org/en/.
[69] Vernon, R., “The Politics of Comparative
Economic Statistics: Three Cultures and Three
Cases,” in Alonso, W. and P. Starr, eds. The
Politics of Numbers, New York, 1987.
[70] Warschauer, M. “Reconceptualizing the Digital
Divide,” First Monday, v.7, no.7, July 2002.
[71] ___. Demystifying the digital divide. Scientific
American 289(2), August 2003, 42-47.
[72] Watson-Verran, Helen, and Leon White. "Issues
of Knowledge in the Policy of SelfDetermination
for
Aboriginal
Australian
Communities."
[73] Wallack, J.S., and N.K. Singh. “Of Demolition
Drives and Creative Destruction,” Indian
Express, October 15, 2006.
[74] Wallack, J.S. “Fire Alarms in Action: Making
Sense of User Feedback on City Services in
Karnataka, India,” under review, 2008.
[75] Wallack, J.S, and S. Nadhamuni, “User
Innovation
and
eGovernance
Design,”
forthcoming in Hidden Successes: Urban
Reforms in India, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
[76] Ziegler, E., and J.S. Wallack, “State Capacity,”
m/s, UCSD, San Diego, 2008.
[77] Wallack, J.S., and T.N. Srinivasan. Federalism
and Economic Reform. Cambridge University
Press. Cambridge, 2006.

