Longitudinal Analysis of Tag Structure in Del.icio.us
Lijiang Guo

Elin Jacob

Nicolas George

Indiana University Bloomington

Indiana University Bloomington

Indiana University Bloomington

1320 E. 10th St., LI 011
Bloomington, IN 47405

1320 E. 10th St., LI 011
Bloomington, IN 47405

1320 E. 10th St., LI 011
Bloomington, IN 47405

lijguo@indiana.edu

ejacob@indiana.edu

ngeorge@indiana.edu

ABSTRACT
This paper describes a three-level structure of folksonomies that
accounts for the aggregation of tags in a social bookmarking
system and describes the results of a preliminary longitudinal
analysis of user-assigned tags collected from del.idio.us.com for
the period 2005-2007. Results of this analysis indicate that
evolving community consensus on the meanings of tags can lead
to the emergence of domain vocabularies that can be useful for
retrieving domain resources.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content Analysis
and Indexing -- indexing methods, thesauruses.

General Terms
Theory, Verification.

Keywords
Tags, Tagging, Folksonomies, Network folksonomies, System
folksonomies, Social bookmarking systems, del.icio.us.com.

1. INTRODUCTION
Adding metadata to digital resources has become a common way
of representing them for future retrieval. Metadata and metadata
schemes are generally created by information professionals, but
such methods encounter limitations in the environment of the
World Wide Web (Web), where an enormous and dynamic
repository of digital resources has made representation an
important issue. Folksonomies are claimed to support an emergent
classification of Web resources, where semantic relations between
tags and resources are assumed to be worked out by users in a
collective and negotiated process. Few studies exist that
investigate how this process is actually accomplished, what the
commonalities of tags are, and how seemingly sporadic tagging
by individuals can become useful metadata for information
retrieval.
This research builds upon current discussions of the mechanisms
behind collective tagging behavior and their theoretical roots to
propose a three-level structure for the aggregation of tags: the
individual folksonomy that aggregates tags assigned by a single
user; the folksonomy network that aggregates user generated tags
within a topical domain; and the system folksonomy that
aggregates all tags assigned within a single social bookmarking
site. It is proposed that a folksonomy network constitutes a
rudimentary indexing language in that the aggregation of tags
assigned within a topical domain can serve as a precursor to a
controlled domain vocabulary. This proposal is supported by the

results of a social network analysis of tags assigned to bookmarks
in the Delicious social bookmarking system over a period of three
continuous years (2005 to 2007). A longitudinal comparison of
the results from exploratory factor analysis reveals that, although
tagging as a whole is scale-free, consistent patterns of aggregated
tagging behavior can be found in folksonomy networks.

2. FOLKSONOMY
A folksonomy consists of user-generated metadata about digital
resources. The word folksonomy was first used by Thomas
Vander Wal (Vander Wal, 2007) as a fusion of the terms folk and
taxonomy to describe the set of tags assigned to resources in an
online information system by a single user. Recent studies of
folksonomies have focused on the social bookmarking systems
(Hammond et al., 2005) that can be found in many different
environments and exemplify a wide range of purposes, including
blogging (WordPress), photo sharing (Flickr), video sharing
(YouTube), and social networking (Facebook). The advantage of
social bookmarking is that it is a bottom-up categorization
structure that generates an emerging indexing language for
resources on the Web (Vander Wal, 2007). Contrary to traditional
classification methods, where specially trained indexers generate a
standard indexing language for all users, a folksonomy is the
result of empowering users with absolute control over their own
information repository. In other words, a folksonomy is an
indexing language generated for the user by the user.
Despite the problems of reference that come with cognitive
categorization and the use of natural language descriptors, tagging
behavior in a network folksonomy appears to demonstrate patterns
of stabilization and convergence. One possible reason is that
tagging creates a feedback loop of asymmetric communication
between users through the medium of the tags themselves
(Mathes, 2004), allowing users to negotiate meaning and reach
consensus about the referents of tags. On a social bookmarking
site, there are at least two kinds of vocabulary: the user’s
vocabulary and the system vocabulary. Each user has his own
collection of tags and tag-URL assignments, which comprise that
user’s unique vocabulary (a folksonomy). The vocabulary of the
system (the system folksonomy) is the aggregation of all user
vocabularies (folksonomies).
However, to make a user’s unique vocabulary communicative,
agreement on vocabulary must be reached across users.
Wittgenstein’s (1958) notion of a language game describes such a
dynamic system. On the one hand, each user has a private
language that is only known to the person speaking (or tagging);
on the other hand, it must be possible, in principle, to align this
with public standards and criteria for correctness. Therefore, the
research question addressed here is whether such a dynamic can

contribute to stabilization and
a
a shared domain vocaabulary
(folksonomy neetwork).
The basic theeoretical modeel of this reseearch resides in the
intersection off classical classsification and categorization
c
theory,
a complex network
n
human cognitioon, motivation for learning, and
systems. Adappted from the fformal model of Hotho, Staaab and
Stumme (2006)), a folksonomyy network is defined as:
, ,

Definition 1. A folksonomy network is a tuple
where,
•

is a folk
ksonomy that has
h

•
•

folksonom
my networks,

is a folksoonomy network of that folksonnomy,
and

a subsets of taags and URLs in
are
i

,

•

is the characteristic
c
fuunction a folksoonomy networkk

•

is a fuunction of

,

,

annd

,

in

.

,soo that for any pair of

Figure 1. Biploot of componen
nt loadings (Frrom top row 2005,
2006, and 2007; from left ccolumn D1xD2, D1xD3, D1xD
D4,
D
D1xD5, D2xD3
3, D2xD4, D2xxD5, D3xD4, D3xD5, and D4xxD5,
where “D”
“ representss an extracted dimension)

.

3. METHO
OD
To draw a reprresentative sam
mple of tags, data was collecteed from
del.icio.us.com
m , which is currrently the largesst social bookm
marking
website. Inform
mation about thhe dataset is shhown in Tablee 1. To
reify our moddel, we have uused a compleex network moodel to
represent a folkksonomy. We collapsed
c
all tuuples (tag, URL
L, user)
to calculate cosine similaritiees between tagss for all URLs and all
users and deecomposed the similarity matrix using eigen
decomposition to extract dimeensionalities. Because
B
each exxtracted
dimension represents a part of the underlyying structure of the
dataset, only a certain porrtion of tags will have a strong
s
plot, the top five
correlation to a given dimensiion. From the scree
dimensions were extracted for each yearr, assuming thhat the
extracted dimeensions are the most representative tag structture for
that year sincce most variaability is accoounted for byy these
dimensions.

4. RESUL
LT
A longitudinall comparison reveals
r
that, allthough tagginng as a
whole is scalee-free, consisteent patterns off aggregated tagging
t
dimensions (i.ee., folksonomy networks) can be found in a system
folksonomy. We
W observed thaat the system foolksonomy consists of
multiple folkssonomy networrks containing
g possible conntrolled
vocabularies thhat are usable ffor searching inn specific domaains. In
Figure 1, all biplots were generated from the same system
folksonomy buut result in diffeerent dimensionns. Each dot represents
a tag, whose position
p
is givenn by its loadinggs on two dimeensions
of the five exxtracted. Figurre 1 indicates that there aree clear
dimensionalitiees among taggs according to user assiggnment
patterns on UR
RLs. Some tags are tightly cllustered, suggesting a
specific topicaal domain. The differences between two topical
domains are maximized
m
becaause there is minimum
m
depenndence
between them,, given that eaach componentt is orthogonall to all
other componeents. Thus eachh dimension rep
presents a folkssonomy
network.
Table 1. Data beforee and after noisse reduction.
Year
2005
2006
2007

Tag
7,372
10,224
12,079

All tags (step 1)
URL
User

Triple

Tags ( >5 unique users) (step
(
2)
Tag
URL
User
Triple

2,817
3,925
6,007

296,998
551,029
759,203

1,586
2,466
3,195

32,794
72,141
104,696

2,802
3,903
5,985

32,267
71,131
103,181

284,281
533,841
737,547

F
Figure
2. Biplot of componen
nt loadings from
m randomized data
(F
From top row 2005, 2006, an
nd 2007; from left
l column D11xD2,
D1xD3, D1xxD4, D1xD5, D2xD3, D2xD4, D2xD5, D3xD
D4,
D3xD5, and
d D4xD5 wheree “D” represen
nts an extracteed
dim
mension)
Figure 1 suggeests that folkksonomy netwo
orks are conssistent
sttructures evolvving across tim
me. By looking at one columnn at a
tiime, we can coompare structurral change acro
oss years. The 2005
sttructure is moree diverse due too its early stagee in the developpment
a domain vocabuulary. As the sttructure develop
ps through 2006 and
2007, tags clustter more closely around their dimensions. From
thhis comparison, it is possible to track the evvolving structurres of
domain vocabulaary developmennt.
T
To verify thatt these patternns are non-raandom, we fu
urther
raandomized all users, tags, aand URLs andd applied the same
prrocedure to thee randomized ddata. The five principal
p
compo
onents
of this random network are shown in Figu
ure 2. As Figuure 2
onal, suggestingg that
demonstrates, thhe dataset is quuite unidimensio
no sub-dimensioons were detecteed.

55. Conclusiion
T
These results inddicate that, whiile a system follksonomy is unlikely
too result in a coherent
c
globall classification system, tagginng of
siimilar resourcees is highly agggregative and can
c point to doomain
dependent vocaabularies that are useful forr retrieving doomain
reesources. It also supports thhe contention that the three-level
sttructure of folksonomies
fo
pprovides an effective lenss for
innterpreting thee seemingly cchaotic role of folksonomies for
innformation retriieval in the Webb environment.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Hammond, T., Hannay, T., Lund, B., and Scott, J. 2005.
Social bookmarking tools (I): A general review. D-Lib
Magazine, 11, 4 (April, 2005). DOI=
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/april05/hammond/04hammond.html
[2] Hotho, A., Jäschke, R., Schmitz, C. and Stumme, G. 2006. In
Information retrieval in folksonomies: Search and ranking. In
The semantic web: Research and application. Springer,
Berlin, Germany, 411-426. DOI=
http://www.springerlink.com/content/r8313654k80v7231/full
text.pdf

[3] Mathes, A. 2004. Folksonomies: Cooperative classification
and communication through shared metadata. DOI=
http://www.adammathes.com/academic/computer-mediatedcommunication/folksonomies.html
[4] Vander Wal, T. 2007. Folksonomy: Folksonomy coinage and
definition. DOI= http://vanderwal.net/folksonomy.html
[5] Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical investigations.
Macmillan, New York, NY.

Columns on Last Page Should Be Made As Close As
Possible to Equal Length

