Mobile Technologies and Disadvantaged Women:
A Mixed Methods Study of Information Behavior
in a Developing Nation Context
Devendra D. Potnis
Doctoral Candidate
College of Computing and Information
State University of New York –
University at Albany
7A Harriman Campus, Suite 220
1400 Washington Ave, Albany,
NY - 12222
Tel: 518-956-8248

dp772351@albany.edu
ABSTRACT
This dissertation research studies the role of mobile technologies
in shaping information behavior of financially disadvantaged
women, who own and use mobile cell phones, and earn less than
US $1 per day, by working at a domestic business set up in rural
India. Wilson’s global model of human information behavior will
be used to study the information behavior of a sample population.
The research findings will be of great use to public sector
organizations, academia as well as private sector organizations in
a variety of different ways.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [Information Systems]: User/Machine Systems – Human
Factors, Human Information Processing.

General Terms
Measurement, Economics, Human Factors

Keywords
Mobile Technologies, Information Behavior, Disadvantaged
Women, Developing Nation

research study plans to explore the linkage between ICTs and the
information behavior of disadvantaged populations from
developing nations; and the role of ICTs in shaping that
information behavior.

2. SAMPLING
Income, health and education are some of the most widely used
criteria to measure the extent to which a population is
disadvantaged [1]. By applying income as a criterion, a sample of
disadvantaged population is identified. India has the world’s
largest number of individuals under the poverty line in a single
country. Hence, India is the context for this research study.
After applying a stratified purposive sampling with 6 filters,
backward class (the term backward class is coined and defined by
Government of India as a set of socio-economically and
educationally disadvantaged population) women (see Figure 1),
who own and use mobile cell phones and earn less than US $1 per
day, by working at a domestic business set up in rural India are
discovered as one of the most disadvantaged populations from
developing nations.

1. INTRODUCTION
As a catalyst for achieving Millennium Development Goals
(MDG), Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)
have been championed by the United Nations as one of the key
media to bring socio-economic opportunities into the lives of
disadvantaged populations from developing nations. Various
studies revealing the role of ICTs as information infrastructure
providers lead us to believe that the introduction of ICTs alone is
not good enough to bring socio-economic changes in their lives.
In fact, after being introduced to ICTs, users’ overall information
behavior changes, which enables them to take advantage of socioeconomic opportunities introduced and facilitated by ICTs. This

Figure 1: An old, blue collar woman using her mobile cell phone
(Source: Maharashtratimes, A local newspaper in India, 11/27/07)

3. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

5. APPLICATIONS OF RESEARCH

Human Information Behavior is defined as “…the totality of
human behavior in relation to sources and channels of
information, including both active and passive information
seeking, and information use. Thus, it includes face-to-face
communication with others, as well as the passive reception of
information as in, for example, watching TV advertisements,
without any intention to act on the information given.” [5]

The research is expected to enrich the field of human information
behavior in the context of ICTs and disadvantaged populations
from developing nations. Research, will serve as a scholarly
reference while crafting policy frameworks and designing dollaraide strategies for building sustainable development using
effective deployment of ICTs in developing nations. Research
findings could benefit government policy makers, when designing
mobile-Government policies and developing execution plans. The
private sector could apply a set of research findings for better
human-centered product designs and interfaces for mobile
technologies, especially mobile cell phones; and developing
marketing strategies for profitable sales of mobile technologies in
colossal markets of developing nations.

To study the information behavior of this filtered sample, the
global model of human information behavior, one of the most
comprehensive and widely accepted human information behavior
models, will be used. The model has been evolved as a result of
the extensive research carried-out for more than a couple of
decades [2]. Based upon the formal body of scholarly research,
this model explores different aspects associated with the human
information behavior informed by allied research areas, including
but not limited to decision-making, innovation, consumer
behavior research, marketing, psychology, health communication
research and information systems design that take into account
users as the focus of interest [2][3]. This model is based upon two
key prepositions. The first is that information needs are a
secondary type of needs arose out of a set of primary needs in
everyday life; and the second preposition focuses on various
barriers encountered by users on their ways to information search
and acquisition [4].

4. RESEARCH DESIGN
Using a sequential explanatory mixed methods research design,
quantitative data collected in the first phase are expected to be
explained by qualitative data from the second phase carried out in
a sequence. In the first phase, quantitative data will be collected
from a stratified purposive sample of approximately 121
disadvantaged women, working in a small village called Bhor
located in one of the western states in India. To select participants
for in-depth interviews in the second phase, trends or patterns in
information behavior of respondents from the first phase will be
categorized based upon demographic factors such as age or
education or marital status. 10 participants from each category
will be interviewed telephonically in Marathi, a native language,
to understand respondents’ information behavior due to the use of
mobile cell phones. Results would reveal a journey of information
behavior of the backward class, financially disadvantaged women
from rural India, when using mobile cell phones.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I would like to thank Dr. Theresa Pardo, Dr. Deborah Andersen,
Dr. Senem Guney and Dr. Hemalata Iyer, members of my
dissertation committee, and Dr. David Andersen and Dr. Lakshmi
Mohan, for their valuable guidance, encouragement and consistent
support.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Bourguignon, F., and Chakravarty, S. R. 2003 The
measurement of multidimensional poverty. Journal of
Economic Inequality 1, 25-49.
[2] Wilson, T. D. 1997 Information Behaviour: an
interdisciplinary perspective. Information Processing and
Management 33, 551–572.
[3] Wilson, T. D. 1994 Information needs and uses: fifty years of
progress? Paper presented at the Fifty years of information
progress: Journal of Documentation review, London.
[4] Beverley, C. A., Bath, P. A., and Barber, R. 2007 Can two
established information models explain the information
behaviour of visually impaired people seeking health and
social care information? Journal of Documentation 63, 9-32.
[5] Wilson, T. D. 2000 Human Information Behavior, Special
Issue
on
Information
Science
Research. Informing Science.

