Network Properties of Social Tags and Collocates

ABSTRACT
In this poster, we apply network analysis methods in two
information networks: a social tagging network and a collocation
network. We try to identify their distinct network patterns under
different language environments and their relationship with IDF.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.7 [Artificial Intelligence]: Natural Language Processing –
discourse, language modeling.

General Terms
Measurement, Documentation, Languages, Theory, Verification.

Keywords
Social tagging, Collocation Network, Chinese

1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, large-scale network analysis has developed
rapidly in various disciplines in order to understand the complex
behavior of human societies. Current large-scale networks studied
in previous research mainly include social networks, information
networks, technology networks and biological networks[1].
Despite differences in the nature of these networks, they exhibit
similar structural features, namely, small-world and scale-free
properties.
In this poster, we apply network analysis methods in two
information networks: a social tagging network and a collocation
network. We try to identify their distinct network patterns under
different language environments. In addition, since the datasets
are comprised of the behavioral dynamics of hundreds of millions
of people, we attempt to discover new insights about human
language that will enable a better understanding of it at both the
individual and societal level.

social tagging has become very popular in Web 2.0 sites, such as
Del.icio.us and Flickr, allowing users to store, organize, and share
Web pages conveniently by means of informal tags instead of the
traditional formal metadata.
As a whole, current research in social tagging can be classified
into four categories. The first category is to construct a network of
tags and demonstrate its network properties. The second category
is to apply semantic relationships to reorganize tags. The third
category is to exploit social tags to improve information retrieval,
such as query formulation or snippet extraction. The last is to find
social trends from the popular tags.
In particular, a closer examination of the properties of tag
networks can lead to a better understanding of how language is
used to describe and classify information. However, relatively
few studies have compared the practice of tagging in English with
that of Chinese sites and users. This raises both technical and
linguistic questions. What is the significance of scale-free and
small-world properties of tag networks across multiple languages?
What is the relationship between tagging and collocation?
Collocation can be defined statistically as words co-occurring
within a certain distance of each other or it can be defined
linguistically on syntactic/semantic bases[1]. Although common
collocations (ex. “partisan politics”) do not intuitively seem to be
useful for distinguishing documents, they are nonetheless what
many people turn to in social tagging. Collocation also has
relevance for computerized extraction of keywords for automated
indexing. In this poster, we utilize the Sogou corpus[3] to construct
the Chinese collocation network. An illustration of the
subnetwork is as shown in figure 1.

2. SOCIAL TAGS AND COLLOCATES
Social tagging is the practice of collaboratively creating and
managing tags to annotate and categorize content. Recently,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
iConference 2009, February 8–11, 2009, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
Copyright 2009 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0004…$5.00.

Figure 1. Subnetwork of a Chinese lexical collocation network
(Pajek)

3. HYPOTHESIS
3.1 Statement of Hypothesis
In this poster, we will demonstrate the scale-free characteristic of
a Chinese lexical collocation network, and we propose the
hypothesis that:
There is negative correlation between terms’ degree and their
inverse document frequency (IDF).

3.2 Testing
To test this hypothesis, we can use a dataset based on more than
one hundred million Web pages. First, we construct the
collocation network with the dataset and calculate the network
degree of each term. Then, we build three samples, each of which
is consists of five hundred terms with their degrees randomly
selected from the collocation network. At the same time, we fetch
the document number N for each term in the samples from the
Chinese search engine “Baidu.” Therefore, we can test the
hypothesis with these datasets as follows.

Log ( K ) ∼ Log ( N ) , K is the degree and N is the document
number.
In fact, the terms’ degree in network can show their collocation
ability, which may affect their occurrence in documents. That is,
terms can occur in more documents if they have stronger
collocation ability, as indicated by their higher degree. This
hypothesis could also provide a potential explanation for Inverse
Document Frequency (IDF), and indicates that the terms’ degree
in the collocation network could be used in terms’ weighting and
keyword extraction for automated indexing.

Figure 2. Degree distribution of social tagging network (in
logarithmic scale)
In the meantime, in the collocation network, assuming that the
frequency, P (k), of a degree, K, is the number of nodes with
degree K, we find that the frequency, P (k), of a term’s degree, K,
is proportional to the term’s degree to the power of a constant, 1.171 ( λ =1.5, 2.75[6]) as below:

p (k ) ∼ k −1.171
Thus, the scale-free feature in the l Collocation Network is
attested. The scatter diagram is as shown in Figure 3 with
logarithmic scale.

4. RESULTS
4.1 Small-world pattern [4]
Table 1. Small-world pattern in social tagging network
Network

C

C(Random)

L

L(Random)

Social tagging

0.792

0.000394

3.99483

5.562321

From table 1, we can conclude that

L

C

Crandom

, and

L random , therefore, this network is a small-world network.

4.2 Scale-free pattern [5]
According to the network analysis results, we find the power-law
degree distribution, that is, the frequency, P (k), of a degree, K, is
proportional to the degree to the power of a constant, -1.46 as
follows:

p (k ) ∼ k −1.46

Figure 3. Chinese Lexical Collocation Network Degree
Distributions. (Log-log plot of frequency P (K) versus the
degree K)

The scatter diagram is as shown in Figure 2 with logarithmic scale.

4.3 Analysis of three samples
After analyzing the three samples, each of which is constituted by
five hundred terms with their degrees randomly selected from the
collocation network, we find persuasive evidence to support
hypothesis in all these three samples. The scatter plot of these
three samples is indicated in Figures 4, 5, and 6.

5. CONCLUSION
5.1 Significance

Figure 4. Log-log plot of degree K versus document number N
in the first sample

One question that arises from the preliminary results in this poster:
What implications might these properties have for the dynamic
behavior of human language systems? In fact, it may be that the
language networks combine significant elements of both order
and randomness with such properties as small world or scale-free.
Thus, the development of language, which is illustrated by
language network growth, may also be influenced by both random
and ordered factors. In addition, there may be some significant
new dynamic phenomena in language development when it is a
small-world network. However, since research into large-scale
networks is relatively new, more studies in this field are needed to
obtain more useful results. As for the hypothesis, it can provide a
potential explanation for the term frequency (TF) and IDF term
weighting method from a network perspective. Moreover, this
hypothesis may also be utilized as a new potential method to
weigh terms in the field of information retrieval and natural
language processing.

5.2 Future Research
As more and more of the Chinese population gains Internet access,
it will be increasingly important for researchers to contextualize
their practice through a more global perspective. This is
especially true for those pursuing scholarship in the areas of
information organization and retrieval, as the Internet user
experience begins to shift from an English-centric to a more
multilingual one. In fact, by the Chinese government’s own
estimation, the number of Internet users in China has multiplied
by a factor of 28 since the year 2000, with the rate of market
penetration still only at approximately 19 percent[7].

Figure 5. Log-log plot of degree K versus document number N
in the second sample

In the future, additional empirical studies should be conducted
using larger datasets to verify the observation that social tag
networks have small world and scale-free properties. A greater
emphasis on semantic relationships between tag words will also
improve the quality of future findings. Moreover, it is worthwhile
to connect the network analysis techniques with computational
linguistics, because it is helpful to indicate the potential
relationship between terms in the process of language evolution
and human mind evolution. This kind of research could also
facilitate artificial intelligence, automatic text processing and
information retrieval.
In addition, tagging, as a way of organizing information, has
implications not only for information professionals and
computational linguists, but for cognitive scientists as well. That
is, social tagging practices offer insight into ontological modeling
and the social nature of epistemology. In this regard, the topic
seems an especially productive one for the convergence of
multiple disciplines.

6. REFERENCES
Figure 6. Log-log plot of degree K versus document number N
in the third sample

[1] Newman, M. E. J. 2003. The structure and function of
complex networks. SIAM Review, 45, 2 (2003), 167-256.
[2] Gledhill, C. 2000. Collocations in science writing.
Tuebingen, Germany: Gunter Narr Verlag.
[3] Sogou Lab. http://www.sogou.com/labs/resources.html,
2008-11-29.

[4] Watts, D. J. and Strogatz, S. H. 1998. Collective dynamics of
‘small-world’ networks. Nature 393 (1998), 440-442.
[5] Albert, R. and Barabási, A. L. 2002. Statistical mechanics of
complex networks. Rev Mod Phys 74 (2002), 47-97.
[6] Ferrer-i-Cancho, R. and Solé, R. V. 2001. The small world of
human language. P Roy Soc Lond B Bio (2001), 268, 7,
2261-2265.

[7] China Internet Network Information Center, Ministry of
Information Industry of the People’s Republic of China.

