Normative Notions of Authorship and Participation in the
iSociety
Laura R. Lenhart
School of Information Resources and Library Science
University of Arizona
1515 E. 1st St.
Tucson, AZ 85719

lenhartl@email.arizona.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses the role that conceptions of authorship play
in governing participation in society. Following a brief review of
the literature, the philosophical method of conceptual analysis is
combined with historical examples to argue that conceptions of
authorship have at least three universal features.
First,
'authorship' demarcates certain activities and practices. Secondly,
conceptions of authorship contain a normative element which is
used to identify which activities and practices are constitutive.
Finally, once identified those activities and practices become
eligible for social, legal, and economic benefits that enable
participation in the i-society.

Topics
e-Inclusion in the iSociety
Information policy, ethics, and law

Keywords
Authorship, participation, conceptual analysis, normativity

1. INTRODUCTION
Authorship is a topic that has been studied by researchers from a
wide variety of fields, including literary theory, sociology, history,
bibliography, and critical theory. Each of these researchers are
equipped with very different sets of theoretical commitments,
preferred methodologies, and objects of study.
Literary theorists have typically focused on the role, or lack
thereof, that authors have played in fixing or constructing the
meaning and significance of their texts. Towards this end, they
have often been particularly concerned with teasing out the
intentions of individual authors through close readings of their
works, correspondence, unpublished materials, and other
documentation of their lives. In Barthes “The Death of the
Author,” he argues not that individuals have ceased to engage in
text-producing activities, but that the author is not, and should not
be, the figure around which meaning and significance are
constructed (Barthes, 1977).
While often grouped with Barthes’ critique of intentionalist
approaches, Foucault’s seminal “What is an author,” is better

characterized as a broad sketch of a research agenda which aims
to identify the social, legal, and economic processes that lead to
the development of the particular role played by the authorfunction. Following Foucault, the legal historian David Saunders
has stated that "it is certainly valuable to distinguish between the
individuals who writes and the authorial personality, status, or
function which he or she might bear and to which legal capacities
might attach" (1994, p. 99). So, too, with the actual practices and
activities that individuals may engage in, and the special
recognition or function that is borne out by conceptions of
authorship.
Despite the attention and effort that has recently been paid to the
subject, there is relatively little consensus regarding what
authorship is. There is certainly no widely agreed upon definition
of authorship, despite the multitude of historically and culturally
specific definitions of authorship that have been used in the
literature. Authorship has been variously defined, implicitly or
explicitly, as the professional, market-driven production of
cultural commodities (cf. Adams, 1990; Griffin, 1990; Turnovsky,
2003); the autonomous creation of original texts or ideas (cf.
Haynes, 2005); and authorship as compilation or craftsmanship
(cf. Summit, 2003; Minnis, 1984).
Attempts to define the term are complicated by the fact that
authorship is a social construct that has been constructed in
different ways in different historical periods and contexts
(Summit, 2005). At best, these definitions are well-suited to
describing authorship within certain historical periods or contexts,
but as authorship is not limited to a particular historical period,
nor isolated to any particular culture, none of these definitions are
well-suited to describing authorship as a global phenomenon. In
particular, these sorts of definitions are unable to capture
authorship practices in the early manuscript period, or authorship
outside of the West and among indigenous peoples. As a result,
they are poor responses to the question, “What is authorship?’
Given the recent attention and the central role ‘authorship’ plays
in our conceptual web, it would be useful for researchers and
scholars to have some consensus regarding an answer to the
question posed above. The philosophical method of conceptual
analysis may be a useful tool to identify such common ground.
Conceptual analysis can generally be described as the process of
breaking a concept down into its basic components in order to
reveal its logical structure. Despite the fact that substantive
conceptions of authorship have changed over time and differ
between cultures, it is possible that the structure and function of
the concept may be stable.

Conceptual analysis is also a useful methodology in this particular
case, as it allows us to avoid problematic anachronism, teleology,
and arguably cultural specificity which can make universal
definitions impossible, and consensus in a multidisciplinary
environment difficult. I argue that there are several universal
features of ‘authorship,’ and that these features shed light on the
role that conceptions of authorship play governing participation in
society. By illustrating these features with historical examples, we
can also attempt to ensure that they are consistent with the
historical record. While by no means offering a universal
definition of authorship, these features do form the basis for a
useful theoretical framework.

2. DEMARCATION
Quite apparently, not all text-producing activities and practices
are those which we consider authorship. As Foucault observes, "a
private letter may well have a signer-it does not have an author; a
contract may have a guarantor-it does not have an author. An
anonymous text posted on a wall probably has a writer-but not an
author" (Foucault, 1979, 148). This illustrates an important
feature of society: only certain kinds of activities and practices are
constitutive of authorship in any given context.
Authorship is something that persons do, either alone or in
concert. It refers to a particular set of activities or practices. There
are a wide range of practices and activities which have at times
been associated with authorship: writing, publication, patronage,
compilation, dictation, editing, etc. (cf. Griffin, 2005; Summit
2003; Dobranski, 1999). This list is by no means exhaustive,
rather, it is intended to demonstrate the variety of activities and
practices which are candidates for authorship. Not all, or even
most, of these activities or practices have been constitutive of
authorship in any particular context. Depending on the context
and historical period, different activities have been interpreted as
"authoring" (Summit, 2003). The same activities and practices in
one historical context that were considered authorship may not
necessarily have been considered authorship in another.
Conceptions and definitions of authorship necessarily identify
which activities and practices are constitutive of the concept. In
other words, 'authorship' necessarily demarcates certain activities
and practices.

3. NORMATIVE ELEMENTS OF
'AUTHORSHIP'
If we accept that 'authorship' demarcates certain practices or
activities, we can further examine the means of demarcation: that
is, how and why are certain practices selected but not others? I
argue that conceptions of authorship necessarily contain a
normative element that is used to identify those activities and
practices that are consistent with the standard.

3.1 Types of normative judgments
Descriptive statements are those that purport to describe some
feature of the world: "The sky is blue," "The table has four legs."
These can generally be contrasted with normative claims that
involve evaluative judgments and prescriptions: "Sushi is good,"

"That's not fair," "One ought never lie" (cf. Wengert, 2001).
There are also several different classes or categories of normative
judgments or claims: aesthetic, epistemic, and moral judgments
are each different sorts of normative judgments.
Aesthetic judgments involve judgments of taste and beauty.
“Sushi is good” is an example of an aesthetic judgment, as is “The
Pieta is beautiful.” Similarly, the statement that “Mann’s The
Magic Mountain is a masterpiece” is also an aesthetic judgment.
In arguing that ‘authorship’ involves a normative element that is
used to demarcate certain activities and practices, I do not mean
to argue that ‘authorship’ involves aesthetic judgments. Rather, I
contend that in addition to judgments of taste or beauty,
conceptions of authorship also contain moral and epistemic
normative judgments which are used identify certain kinds of
practices and activities that are deemed more worthy or valuable.
Moral judgments and claims are those which track the rightness
or wrongness and goodness or badness of actions or character.
Normative epistemic judgments or claims track features of some
of our epistemological beliefs about how we acquire knowledge
and what knowledge consists in. Not all epistemic judgments or
claims are normative. Statements or judgments concerning truth
are arguably descriptive. However, statements and judgments
concerning knowledge are normative, and are also importantly
involved in conceptions of authorship.

3.2 The Romantic conception of authorship
To illustrate, let us consider the Romantic conception of
authorship: the autonomous creation of original ideas and text (cf.
Haynes, 2005; Woodmansee, 1984). This particular conception of
authorship involves the notions of 'originality' and 'genius' and
can be traced as far back as Edward Young's Conjectures on
Original Composition (1759). His work would be influential on
many German philosophers during the 18th century, who adopted
his thoughts on original composition in their own works on the
nature of authorship and literary property.
Prior to this, the received view of authorship was the idea that the
author is best characterized as an artisan or as a craftsman: he uses
traditional materials, rules, and ideas, those that had been handed
down by posterity, in order to produce certain effects. Authors
could occasionally move beyond the mere manipulation of
received goods to create works that were truly great. In these
instances, authors were said to be inspired: typically by the Muses
or God (Woodmansee, 1984). What is important is that the source
of inspiration was external to the individuals who were actually
writing.
Young substituted originality and genius for inspiration. The
source of the great works was no longer situated outside of the
author, but within:
The mind of a man of Genius is a
fertile and pleasant field, pleasant as
Elysium, and fertile as Tempe; it enjoys
a perpetual Spring. Of that Spring,
Originals are the fairest Flowers:
Imitations are of quicker growth, but
fainter bloom (1759).

This particular passage highlights two features that have been
inherited by the Romantic conception of authorship. First, it is
notable that the source of originality lies in the mind of the writer.
Secondly, while the genius produces both works that are
imitations and works that are original, original works are to be
valued more than imitations. While this may seem both intuitive
and obvious to the modern reader, it is a marked contrast to earlier
scholastic attitudes towards composition, knowledge, and
authority.
On this interpretation of authorship, we can equate "Mary is an
author," with "Mary autonomously creates original ideas and
text." That statement is much stronger than descriptive statements
such as "Mary writes" or "Mary wrote that text." While the latter
two statements are descriptive accounts of a particular individual's
activities, the former involves an evaluative judgment about the
nature and result of those activities: that Mary acts autonomously,
and that the results are "original." Built into this particular
concept of authorship is the notion that originality is to be sought
and encouraged.

4. SOCIAL, LEGAL, AND ECONOMIC
BENEFITS
Having hopefully established the normative feature and the
demarcative function of 'authorship', we can identify another
common feature: once certain practices or activities have been
demarcated as constitutive of authorship, those practices and
activities are eligible for certain social, economic, and legal
benefits. These benefits play an important role in governing
participation in society. As a result, there are practical
ramifications to the particular conception of authorship that
obtains in any context.
The legal instrument of copyright, for example, is designed to
give individuals the exclusive rights to copy, distribute, display,
and make derivative works. These rights give copyright holders
an ability to control how works are accessed, disseminated, and
used within society. It also allows authors to profit, either socially,
economically, or both, from the distribution and sale of their
works. Copyright originates with authors, but only certain kinds
of works are eligible for copyright. Eligibility is dependent upon a
particular normative conception of authorship: works must
display originality in order to qualify. The following sections will
attempt to demonstrate that intellectual property laws, copyright
in this case, often assume or are based upon particular
conceptions of authorship.

4.1 'Authorship' and copyright
The German states were slow to adopt copyright laws. Even as
they did so, each state only had the ability to enforce the laws
within their particular territory. Combined with a shared language
and literary culture, this created an environment ripe for piracy
(Saunders, 1992). Piracy negatively affected writers, as it reduced
printers' ability to compensate them for their works. Most authors
wanted to end piracy and therefore wanted more stringent,
enforceable copyright laws that recognized their interests and
rights in regard to their work.

The 18th century German philosophers work on the nature of
authorship and composition was motivated by, and contingent
upon, a particular set of historical circumstances (cf. Saunders,
1992; Woodmansee, 1984). They were doing more than just
theorizing about the nature of authorship: they were utilizing this
conception of authorship as an argument for a particular kind of
intellectual property law. If an authors' work is an expression of
his or her personality or essence, who else would it belong to but
him or her? They were establishing the groundwork for what
would later be called the rights of personality which formed the
basis for much of the Continental framework of intellectual
property.
Intellectual property laws tend to presume or rely upon particular
conceptions of authorship. This is true not only of the Continental
framework for intellectual property, but also of the AngloAmerican model instigated with the landmark 1710 Statute of
Anne. The Statute of Anne was the first legal copyright law
implemented, and also marked the first time that authors, rather
than printers or booksellers, were the locus of the right to copy,
sell, and distribute works. For our purposes, it is important that
rather than cementing the status of literary property in early
modern England, the Statute of Anne sparked a debate on the
nature of authorship and literary property that lasted from 1710
until 1774, with the House of Lords ruling on Donaldson v.
Becket (Rose, 1994).
An important thread running through the debate was the role of
authors within society. The early 18th century was the beginning
of the rise of the professionalization of authorship heralded by the
growth of a literary marketplace and a decline in the importance
of certain kinds of patronage. Authors, including the likes of
Samuel Johnson and Alexander Pope, were increasingly
considered independent professionals. This particular conception
of authorship could be characterized as the production of cultural
commodities. When the House of Lords ruled in 1774 to uphold
the limits to copyright terms established by the Statute of Anne,
the House effectively ruled in favor of a conception of authorship
that presented the author as a proprietor, whose interests must be
balanced with those of the public (cf. Ross, 1992).
These two competing conceptions of authorship, as the production
of cultural commodities and as the autonomous original text and
ideas, form the basis for two very different models of intellectual
property law. The Continental model, which presumes the
Romantic notion of authorship, assumes that authors have certain
inalienable rights in regards to their works. Our Anglo-American
model, while influenced by the Romantic notion in it's
requirements on originality, is still primarily based on the idea
that the author is best characterized as a proprietor.

5. AUTHORSHIP AND PARTICIPATION
As demonstrated by the fact that these laws and policies presume
a particular conception of authorship, there are ethical
considerations regarding whether that conception of authorship
fosters participation in the i-society. The activities and practices
demarcated by conceptions of authorship become eligible for
social, legal, and economic benefits; but those activities and
practices that are not demarcated can be hindered and individuals'

engaging in them may be excluded. This section of the paper will
use examples of indigenous cultural production to demonstrate
that there are important ethical considerations to be made
regarding how we foster participation in the i-society, and what
our objectives ought to be.
First, however, it will be necessary to demonstrate the importance
of authors and authorship to participation in society. The
following section endeavors to lay out the relationship between
authorship and participation.

5.1 The importance of authors and authorship
to participation in society
Whether we characterizes ourselves as members of an information
society, knowledge society, post-industrial society, or dismiss
such assertions as misleading, it seems relatively uncontroversial
to note that the means through which information is accessed,
disseminated, and used are changing. Perhaps more controversial,
but nonetheless plausible, is the assertion that information itself is
becoming or has become more fundamental to the cultural,
economic, and social activities that we engage in.
Regardless, it remains true that before information or knowledge
can be accessed or acquired, it must first be created or be
available through some means. Primarily, information or
knowledge is possessed by individuals who then choose to share
or exchange it. Writing, editing, collaborating, and other similar
activities can be means of sharing and exchanging that
information or knowledge. From the foregoing sections, it should
hopefully be clear that authorship, then, is a particular kind of
sharing and exchange of information, one that is facilitated by the
social, legal, and economic benefits that are conferred upon those
activities and practices that are deemed constitutive.
Writing, collaborating, editing and similar activities are just a few
ways that individuals participate in society by sharing the
knowledge or information they have. And when individuals
access and use the products of those activities, they, too, are
participating in society. This raises an important point about these
activities and participation: by engaging in them individuals
actively participate in society, however, their engagement also
enables other individuals to participate by accessing the products
of those activities.

5.2 Indigenous attitudes towards intellectual
property and authorship
As noted above, the Anglo-American system of intellectual
property law is deeply influenced by the idea that the author is
best characterized as a proprietor: an individual involved in the
production of commodities which are available through a market,
whose interest must be balanced with that of the public. This can
be contrasted with the Continental model of intellectual property
law that is apt to consider works created by an author to be an
expression or manifestation of her personality or essence. While
these are markedly different approaches to intellectual property
law influenced by different notions of authorship, they are more
closely related to each other than to indigenous or non-Western
conceptions of authorship and intellectual property.

Both conceptions assume that the appropriate locus of intellectual
property is that of the individual. Many indigenous and nonWestern cultures view the community or society as the possessors
of ideas, information, and knowledge (cf. Brown, 2003; Townley,
2002; Endeshaw, 2005). While individual writers, artists, or
storytellers may be the custodians or guardians who are entrusted
with preserving and sharing such information or knowledge, their
role as authors is more akin to that of a trustee (Brown, 2003, p.
46). Ultimate responsibility and ownership for the intellectual
property rests with the community, group, or society.
The case of Bulun Bulun and Milpurrurru v. R & T Textiles Pty.
Ltd. is a good illustration of the way that many indigenous
cultures view the relationship between an author and the
community (Brown, 2003, p. 44). The first plaintiff in this
copyright infringement suit, Bulun Bulun, is an Aboriginal artist
whose work has attained a global following. The second plaintiff,
George Milpurrurru, is a senior clan official for the Ganalbingu
community. When a textile company imported fabric containing
images from one of Bulun Bulun’s more famous paintings without
his consent, Bulun Bulun and Milpurrurru together brought suit:
they alleged that not only was Bulun Bulun harmed, but his
community, as well (Brown, 2003, p. 45-46). While Bulun Bulun
may be “authorized” by his clan to depict certain kinds of
religious and cultural imagery, he does so for the benefit and
under the supervision of the traditional owners: the clan.
This particular case illustrates the role that many indigenous
authors or creators play within their communities. Case law
regarding indigenous cultural production has in many ways
improved, for instance, much indigenous art was once deemed
uncopyrightable: folklore, or “folkloric” art, was regarded as
lacking the requisite originality (Brown, 2003, p. 44).
These conceptions of authorship and intellectual property are not
uncommon among indigenous peoples and outside of the West. In
Asia, difficulty enforcing intellectual property law is partly
attributable to differing social and cultural assumptions regarding
the nature of intellectual property, namely that intellectual
“property” is ultimately held by society or the community as a
whole (cf. Endeshaw, 2005).
At this point, it should hopefully be clear that conceptions of
authorship underlying intellectual property law are fundamentally
different from those held by many indigenous communities and
non-Western cultures.

5.3 Ethical considerations
By conferring certain social, legal, or economic benefits on the
activities and practices that are deemed constitutive, the notion of
authorship facilitates participation in society for those who
engage in those activities, and also for other individuals accessing
the products of those activities. Depending on the particular
conception of authorship that obtains, more or fewer of those
activities will be facilitated, which will have consequences for not
only those engaging in them, but also for those who participate by
accessing those products.
It does not follow from the fact that the conceptions of authorship
which underlie intellectual property law are fundamentally
different from those which obtain in indigenous cultures that the

conception somehow fails to foster participation in society, or that
other conceptions of authorship foster participation more
effectively. But, it does demonstrate that we are faced with a set
of alternatives. Presented with such, we can ask ourselves which
conception is the best means to foster participation. The final
section of this paper attempts to identify one ethical consideration
regarding conceptions of authorship and participation in society,
though ultimately abstains on the issue.
Before we can address the question of which conception of
authorship best fosters participation in society, we must first
address the question of what our goals are. A natural objective
regarding participation would be to maximize participation in
terms of the total number of individuals who participate. Another
compelling objective would be to ensure participation among the
least-advantaged members of society. There are certainly other
objectives that we might adopt, however, given limited time and
space, I will devote my attention to what seem the most
compelling candidates.

5.3.1 Maximizing participation among individuals
In his defense of intellectual freedom, John Stuart Mill provides
us with one reason to think that maximizing participation among
individuals would be optimal: exposure to a wide array of
opinions, perspectives, and beliefs is the best means to ensure that
individuals acquire true beliefs. If, as Mill argues, truth is
generally more useful than falsity, then maximizing participation
among individuals would be a way to attempt to ensure that they
acquired more useful beliefs (Mill, 1989). If this were our goal,
then we would ideally want a conception of authorship which
would facilitate participation for as large a number of individuals
as possible.

benefits that facilitate participation. This framework for
authorship provides a means of establishing non-arbitrary order
on what is a rich and varied subject, as well as raises some
important ethical considerations regarding which conceptions of
authorship best foster participation in society.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Adams, J.E. (1990). "The Economies of Authorship:
Imagination and Trade in Johnson's Dryden." Studies in
English Literature 1500-1900, 30, 467-486.
[2] Brown, M.F. (2003). Who Owns Native Culture?
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[3] Dobranski, S. B. (1999). Milton, Authorship, and the Book
Trade. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[4] Endeshaw, A. (2005). “Intellectual property enforcement in
Asia: A reality check.” International Journal of Law and
Information Technology, 13(3), 378-411.
[5] Foucault, M. (1979). "What is an author?" From Textual
Strategies: Perspectives in Post-Structuralist Criticism.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press
[6] Griffin, D. (2005). "The social world of authorship
1660-1714." From The Cambridge History of English
Literature, 1660-1784. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
[7] Griffin, D. (1990). "The beginnings of modern authorship:
Milton and Dryden." Milton Quarterly, 24(1), 1-7.
[8] Haynes, C. (2005). "Reassessing 'genius' in studies of
authorship." Book History, 8, 287-320.

5.3.2 Ensuring participation among the leastadvantaged members of society

[9] Mill, J.S. (1975). On Liberty. Ed. by David Spitz. New York:
Norton.

Alternatively, we might decide that in the interest of being just,
we might decide to ensure participation among the leastadvantaged members of society. While the best way to ensure
participation is not immediately clear, John Rawls’ could
potentially provide us with the principles that might guide such an
endeavor (Rawls, 1999).

[10] Minnis, A.J. (1984). "Literary theory and literary practice."
Medieval theory of authorship: scholastic literary attitudes
in the later Middle Ages. London: Scholar Press.

Consistent with Rawls’ two principles of justice, to ensure
participation among the least advantaged members of society we
might adopt a conception of authorship that preserved an
egalitarian right to participate, such that individuals have equal
opportunity to engage in the practices and activities that are
constitutive. Any differences in the way social, legal, economic
benefits of demarcation would be distributed would need to be
guided by the principle that inequalities should be structured in
such as way as to benefit the least advantaged members of society.

6. CONCLUSION
The picture that emerges from the above discussion of authorship
hopefully establishes that conceptions of authorship utilize
normative judgments regarding which text-producing practices
and activities are more valuable in order to establish the limits and
boundaries of the term. Once demarcated, those activities and
practices are eligible for certain legal, economic, and social

[11] Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press.
[12] Rose, M. (1994). “The author as proprietor: Donaldson v.
Becket and the genealogy of modern authorship." From Of
authors and origins: Essays on copyright law. New York:
Oxford.
[13] Ross, T. (1992). "Copyright and the Invention of Tradition."
Eighteenth-Century Studies, 26(1), 1-27.
[14] Saunders, D. (1992). Authorship and Copyright. New York:
Routledge.
[15] Saunders, D. (1994). "Dropping the subject: An argument for
a positive history of authorship and the law of copyright."
From Of authors and origins: Essays on copyright law. New
York: Oxford University Press
[16] Summit, J. (2003). "Women and authorship." The Cambridge
Companion to Medieval Women's Writing. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.

[17] Townley, C. (2002). “Intellectual property and indigenous
knowledge.” Philosophy and Public Policy Quarterly, 22(4),
21-28.
[18] Turnovsky, G. (2003). "The Enlightenment literary market:
Rousseau, authorship, and the book trade." EighteenthCentury Studies, 36(3), 387-410.

[19] Wengert, R. (2001). "Some ethical aspects of being an
information professional." Library Trends, 49(3), 486-509.

