Online Learning at iSchools – Review of Current Offerings
Julia Kampov-Polevoi, Javed Mostafa
Laboratory for Applied Informatics Research
University of North Carolina
100 Manning Hall, CB #3360
Chapel Hill, NC 27599

jkampov@email.unc.edu, jm@unc.edu
1.

INTRODUCTION

The rapid growth in the knowledge and information sector of
economy in the recent decades has led to a shift from the
traditional educational paradigm to the concept of lifelong
learning. Wide acceptance of this concept in the US can be
illustrated by the fact that overwhelming majority of state
governors ranked encouraging lifelong learning as the top
educational issue [1]. According to the most recent government
report [2], there has been a steady increase in student enrollment
in post-secondary educational institutions and the trend is
expected to continue over the next decade with most significant
growth in the 25-34 age group (near 30%) and almost as much
growth in the over 35 age group as among 18-24 year olds with
the number of graduate and professional students increasing 18%
and 20% respectively. In other words, it is expected that people
will be seeking more advanced education or new professional
skills and at later stages of their lives. It is reasonable to expect a
proportionate increase in the demand for degrees in the field of
Information Science.
Higher education infrastructure cannot handle such growth in
demand without exploring alternatives to traditional classroom
learning. One of the ways to meet the projected demand in
graduate/professional education is to develop or extend online
education offerings.
By expanding temporal and spatial
boundaries of educational institutions, online learning not only
allows the educational institutions to grow beyond the physical
limits of their campuses, but also increases accessibility of
education to students that, for various reasons, cannot take part in
traditional educational programs. In fact, there has been a steady
increase in student demand for online learning opportunities that
provide the flexible, time-efficient, and relevant to workplace
education they desire. According to most recent nationwide
survey [3], the number of students taking at least one online
course in a semester has been increasing steadily and is projected
to continue to grow with online enrollment currently comprising
nearly 20% of total student enrollment. Not, surprisingly,
majority of post-secondary educational institutions consider
online learning important to their overall strategy [3] with two
thirds having online offerings ranging from select courses to fullyonline degree programs. Yet, one third of institutions have no
online offerings.
How do information science programs fit into the online learning
landscape? Our study will attempt to answer this question by
exploring the current status of online education in IS.
Specifically, we plan to review existing programs in terms of their
business models, technological platforms and delivery format as
well as assess barriers to establishing or expanding online
programs. The goal is to understand what opportunities and

challenges affect building online education capacity for the IS
programs. This poster reports the preliminary findings from a
pilot study focused on the 19 US based members of iSchool
Caucus and aimed at pilot-testing our methodology.

2.

METHODS

The study uses a three-stage approach: (1) analysis of content of
the programs’ websites, (2) email survey of programs’
administrators, and (3) in-depth telephone interviews of a small
sample of administrators.
The goal is to gain a better
understanding of online learning in the IS environment by
gradually progressing from informal search to more detailed and
structured inquiry.
For the pilot, we started by browsing the websites of the US
iSchools, looking for any information about online offerings,
which we expected to find in the sections labeled as “academics”,
“programs”, “courses” and “schedules” (in the latter we looked
for “web”, “online” or similar indication for course
location/delivery). This intensive browsing was augmented with
thorough keyword searches.
Keywords, such as “online
course(s)”, “web-based”, “distance learning”, “distance
education”, “online degree”, were used to search the web site of
each iSchool as well as the site of its parent university. Despite
the differences in web site structures, the amount and granularity
of information provided, we were able to obtain similar
information for all programs enabling us to do the initial
comparison and providing the basis for development of the survey
questions. Additionally, we were interested in the format and
technology platform(s) used to deliver online courses. This
information, when not explicitly stated as part of the description
of available online options, was obtained by expanding browsing
and search to technical support areas of the web sites of each
school and its parent university. While this approach may fail to
capture all the different technologies used for online education, it
allows us to determine the main delivery platform(s), which was
deemed sufficient for the current stage of the pilot.

3.
3.1

PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Online Learning Offerings

The majority of US iSchools (14 of 19) offer some online learning
options. Nine schools offer complete online degrees. Of the
other five schools, four offer limited number of online courses
with availability changing every semester and one has a
substantial number of online courses and is in the process of
developing a fully-online degree. Surprisingly, using methods
described above, we were unable to find any information about
online credit course or degree offerings for five of the schools in
the sample. Still, compared to national averages, US iSchools

appear to be more engaged in online learning: 48% vs.35% offer
online degrees and 74% vs. 66% have some online learning
options.
Preliminary analysis of the details of online options offered by
fourteen iSchools reveals several patterns. First, the schools
offering full degrees or having plans to offer such degrees in the
near future are affiliated with universities that have strong online
branches and offer a number of online degrees from different
fields of study. Second, the fully-online degrees offered by
iSchools tend to be career-oriented professional degrees at the
Master’s level or advanced practice post-Masters’ certificates that
are geared towards working professionals in need of additional
education to meet new career challenges or those seeking to
prepare for a new career in the information related field.
The prevalence of Library Science related online degrees
prompted us to conduct a survey of web sites of all US based
ALA accredited schools (majority of iSchools being also in this
group) using the same methodology as described in section 2.
The comparison revealed that the patterns of online engagement
for ALA schools/programs is very similar to national averages,
but the ALA schools that are also members of the iSchool Caucus
lead with 54% offering full degrees and 85% having some online
learning options.

3.2

Delivery Platform and Format

The vast majority of iSchools offering online courses use some
commercial or open-source Course Management System (CMS)
to deliver course materials. Blackboard is the most popular
system used by eight schools. Other CMS used include Moodle,
Sakai, eCollege and ANGEL Learning.
Web-conferencing
software seems to be gaining popularity, but only one school uses
such technology as the main online platform. Mixing different
technologies within the same program appears to be uncommon.
The delivery formats of online courses ranges from fully-online to
hybrid (requiring some face-to-face meetings). Individual courses
tend to be fully-online, but degree programs often have a
mandatory short-term (4-10 days) residency requirement at the
beginning of the program or semester.
Survey of ALA accredited programs produced largely similar
results, including dominance of CMS, particularly Blackboard, as
the delivery platform. However, there are more programs in this
group that use a mix of technologies and there is a wider
utilization of broadcast and videoconferencing.

4.

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PLANS

From the preliminary analysis, it would seem that the presence
and nature of online offerings at an iSchool largely depends on

the level of online learning engagement of the parent institution.
It is much easier to offer an online degree as part of an existing
“university online”, and it may be not feasible for an individual
school to acquire and support the technology needed for online
course delivery. But what about schools that offer some online
courses and are affiliated with universities that have contracts
with vendors of online learning platforms? Indeed, roughly equal
number of iSchools uses Blackboard or Moodle to deliver either
select online courses or full degrees. What prevents the programs
offering select courses from growing their online capacity when
they have access to the same technology as the peer programs
offering full online degrees? What barriers exist to these iSchools
becoming leaders in online learning at their respective
universities? Most of the degree programs available online are
professional practice oriented. Perhaps programs with strong
academic research emphasis have lesser interest in developing
online capacity. We plan to explore all these dimensions further
through our survey and interviews.
Other factors we plan to explore in the next stage of the pilot
project include: business models, program histories, strategic
plans and resistance to engaging in online education. We want to
take a closer look at some successful online IS programs and see
what lessons can be learned from them. This work will lay the
foundation for a broader study, including international
institutions, that is currently in the planning stage.

5.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Partial funding for this project was provided by SILS, UNC at
Chapel Hill. We are grateful for this support. We are also
indebted to AMICAL for partial support of this initiative,
particularly for the part focusing on current online learning
technologies and their application in distance education.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] de Alva, J.K. (2000). Remakign the Academy. 21st-Century
Challenges to Higher Education in the Age of Information.
Educause Review, 35(2), 32 –40..
[2] Hussar, W.J., and Bailey, T.M. (2008). Projections of
Education Statistics to 2017. Washington, DC: National
Center for Education Statistics, US Department of
Education.
[3] Allen I.E., and Seaman, J. (2007). Online Nation. Five
Years of Growth in Online Learning. Needham, MA: Sloan
Consortium

