The Impact of National Culture on Knowledge Sharing Activities in Global Virtual
Collaboration: the Chinese Case
Kangning Wei
l
School of Information Studies
Syracuse University

kwei@syr.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the impact of national culture on knowledge
sharing activities in global virtual collaboration. In specific, the
Chinese culture is examined.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.4 [Computer Applications]: Social and Behavioral Sciences Sociology

General Terms

country like Japan. Despite the fact that industries has been
relocating from developed countries to low cost developing
countries, little research has been done in a context of developing
countries. China presents an extremely interesting example given
its growing importance in global economics and its strong ability
to receive foreign direct investment. More specifically, the U.S.
culture was selected as the control culture given the important
relationship between China and the U.S. in economic field. In
other words, this research only focuses on the Chinese perceptions
of the impact of Chinese culture on their knowledge sharing
activities when they virtually work with the U.S. colleagues.

Management, Performance, Human Factors

Keywords
Knowledge sharing, global virtual collaboration, national culture,
concern for face, language

1. INTRODUCTION
The knowledge-based view of the firm [1] emphasizes the
importance of knowledge management in modern organizations.
Knowledge sharing is a key process in knowledge management
practices. Recent research on knowledge sharing has identified a
variety of factors that lead to effective knowledge sharing, such as
motivation [2] and culture [3], but few studies have focused on
addressing knowledge sharing activities in different settings [4].
One interesting example is in virtual collaboration, especially in
global virtual collaboration.
Knowledge sharing in virtual collaboration is different than in
traditional face-to-face settings. By using ICT, virtual
collaboration can facilitate knowledge sharing in terms of easily
organizing diverse backgrounds of the knowledge workers and
increasing accessibility to information and knowledge [5]. On the
other hand, the geographic, temporal, organizational and/or
cultural discontinuities [6] that may exist in virtual collaboration
may create problems that can hinder knowledge sharing among
team members.
One of the major barriers to knowledge sharing is cultural
differences [7]. This problem is even more prominent in global
virtual collaboration settings since the team members may come
from different departments, organizations and/or different
countries. Thus, different levels of culture may shape members’
knowledge sharing behavior, but little research has explored the
effect of cultural differences on knowledge sharing activities in
virtual collaboration [8].

2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND
HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT
Knowledge sharing is defined as the exchange of task-related
information, know how, and feedback regarding a product or
procedure [9]. Literature review in the fields of knowledge
sharing, global virtual collaboration and cross-cultural studies
revealed that the existing research on cross-cultural issues in
knowledge sharing activities in global virtual collaboration setting
is limited.
Most research on cross-cultural studies uses value-based cultural
dimensions such as Hofstede’s [10] five dimensions, and has been
mainly conducted at a single cultural level. Recently, researchers
have argued that individual’s behavior is influenced by different
levels of culture ranging from supranational level through the
national, professional, and organizational levels to the group level,
and all these different cultures can influence individual’s behavior
simultaneously [11, 12]. As a result, culture must be measured at
an individual level; after the individual level data is aggregated, it
will be possible to assert whether a certain cultural characteristic
is common to a certain culture or not [12].
After a careful examination of national cultural dimensions in
literature, Terpstra and Sarathy’s [13] eight dimensions 1 of
national culture was chosen as a start to refine the relevant
cultural factors in this research because it includes not only the
value-based cultural factors but the non-value based cultural
dimensions such as language and material culture, which have
been also identified as important factors that impact individual
behaviors in cross-cultural research [e.g. 3].
A field study conducted in 2006 was served as a basis for the
development of the hypotheses used in this study 2 . Given the
1

So to fill these gaps, I propose to study the impact of national
culture on knowledge sharing in global virtual collaboration. In
this research, I focused on one specific nation: the Peoples’
Republic of China. Knowledge management research is usually
done in the context of western countries or a specific developed

The eight dimensions are: technology and material culture,
language, aesthetics, education, religion, attitudes and values,
social organization and political life.

 2 Actually, the research described in this paper is the second
phase of the researcher’s dissertation. The first phase is to use
an exploratory case study approach to explore how national

space limit, here will only briefly report the constructs that were
identified for the survey. A description of the field study is
provided in Appendix 1.

H2c: The perceived degree of concern for face negatively affects
the participation effectiveness in social-related communication in
global virtual collaboration.

Three cultural factors (language difference, technology
infrastructure and concern for face), three knowledge sharing
activities (the preference for using different types of tools in terms
of written-based and voice-based communication tools,
participation in task-related and social-related communication)
and two factors that impact individual’s perceptions of concern
for face (extraversion and adaptation to organizational culture)
were identified from the case study. The relationships between
these factors were further examined in the survey. The research
model is presented in Figure 1. The hypotheses are illustrated
below. Given the space limit, the rationale behind the hypotheses
development is not explained here. Instead, it is provided in
Appendix 2.

H3a: The quality of technology infrastructure positively affects
the effectiveness of participation in task-related communication in
global virtual collaboration.

Perceived quality of
technology
infrastructure

H3a

Knowledge Sharing
Activities

H3b

preference of the use
of Knowledge sharing
tools

H1a

Perceived English
Competence

H1b
H1c

Effectiveness of
Participation in taskrelated Communication

H4
H2a
Perceived Concern
for Face
H5a
Extraversion

H2b

H5b

H2c

Effectiveness of
Participation in socialrelated Communication

Adaptation to
Organizational
culture

Figure 1. Research Model
H1a: The perceived English competence affects the preference for
the use of different types of knowledge sharing tools in global
virtual collaboration. The more competent one’s English skills are,
the less written based communication tools s/he would like use.
H1b: The perceived English competence positively affects the
effectiveness of participation in task-related communication in
global virtual collaboration.
H1c: The perceived English competence positively affects the
effectiveness of participation in social-related communication in
global virtual collaboration.
H2a: The perceived degree of concern for face affects the
preference for the use of different types of knowledge sharing
tools in global virtual collaboration. The more one concerns for
face, the less voice based tools s/he would like use.

H3b: The quality of technology infrastructure positively affects
the effectiveness of participation in social-related communication
in global virtual collaboration.
H4: perceived English competence is negatively related to the
perceived degree of concern for face.
H5a: Extraversion is negatively associated the perceived degree of
concern for face in global virtual collaboration.
H5b: The degree of adaptation to organizational culture is
negatively associated with the perceived degree of concern for
face in global virtual collaboration.

3. METHOD
For this research, an online survey approach was applied. The
instrument used in the survey includes items gathering
demographic information of the respondents and items measuring
the research constructs implied in the research model. The
measures for the constructs in the research model were adapted
from those validated in prior studies with minor wording changes
made to incorporate the context of global virtual collaboration.
The survey instrument was translated into Chinese and pre-tested
before the final administration. The subjects were recruited from
Chinese individuals who work in an American company in China
and have had virtual collaboration experiences with the
Americans. A small number of incentive prizes were provided to
encourage participation. Partial Least Squares (PLS) were used to
analyze the survey data.

4. RESULTS
In total, the final sample consists of 63 valid responses.
SmartPLS 3 was used to analyze the final data. Measurement
model and structural model were assessed. The measurement
model was assessed in terms of reliability and validity. In
summary, the measurement model was found to be effective.
Given the space limit, here I will only report the results for the
hypotheses testing, which are depicted in Figure 2 and
summarized in Table 1.

H2b: The perceived degree of concern for face negatively affects
the effectiveness of participation in task-related communication in
global virtual collaboration.

culture impact knowledge sharing activities in global virtual
collaboration and what kind of other factors that may mediate
the impacts. The purpose of the case study is to understand the
research questions qualitatively and generate a set of hypotheses,
which can be tested in phase two.

3 Ringle, C.M./Wende, S./Will, S.: SmartPLS 2.0 (M3) Beta,
Hamburg 2005, http://www.smartpls.de.

R2=.203

Perceived quality of
technology
infrastructure

.104***

preference of
Knowledge sharing
tools

.309****

-.391

R2=.205

Perceived English
Competence

.434****
.283****

.020

R2=.058

-.226
R2=.225

Perceived Concern
for Face

.0.048
.179***

-.182****

Extraversion

Effectiveness of
Participation in taskrelated Communication

Effectiveness of
Participation in socialrelated Communication

.169*
Adaptation to
Organizational
culture

**** significant at .001
*** significant at .01
** significant at .05
* Significant at .10

Figure 2. Results of PLS Analysis

Table 1. Results of Hypothesis Testing
H

Path
coefficient

T value

H1a

-0.391

1.375

Not Supported

H1b

0.434

10.344

Supported

H1c

0.283

6.330

Supported

H2a

-0.226

1.142

Not supported

H2b

0.048

0.645

Not Supported

H2c

0.179

3.066

Not supported
(Significant but in
opposite direction)

H3a

0.104

2.632

Supported

H3b

0.309

8.189

Supported

H4

0.020

0.373

Not supported

H5a

-0.182

4.999

Supported

H5b

0.169

1.896

Not supported
(Significant but in
opposite direction)

Result

5. DISCUSSIONS
In this survey, I examined the relationships between Chinese
cultural factors and knowledge sharing activities in global virtual
collaboration with the Americans. Generally, hypotheses
regarding the impact of language and technology infrastructure
were supported. Language was found to be the strongest factor
that influences knowledge sharing activities. However, hypotheses
regarding concern for face were not supported, and the results
showed mixed results for participation effectiveness in taskrelated vs. social-related communication. In the following section,
I provided discussions for these interesting findings.
As expected, there was a significant negative impact of
extraversion on concern for face. However, none of the
hypotheses regarding the impact of concern for face on knowledge
sharing activities was supported. Further, concern for face was
found to have a reverse hypothesized relationship with

participation effectiveness in social-related communication (H2c).
While it might be difficult to understand at a first glance, a
plausible explanation does exist for such observations, which rely
on a deeper examination of the concept of the “concern for face”
itself.
Face is “the respect, pride, and dignity of an individual as a
consequence of his or her social achievement” [14 p.1575] .
People try to enhance his or her face or try to avoid losing his or
her face to gain respect and recognition from others [15]. So
usually there are two behaviors related to concern for face: face
gaining behavior and face saving behavior. Saving face does not
necessarily mean gaining face, because face could only be gained
through others’ recognition and admiration [16]. Hwang et al. [17]
propose that people would behave differently towards face saving
and face gaining. For example, by surveying 159 MBA students in
a major university in eastern China, Huang and her colleagues [16]
found that face saving behavior has a negative relationship with
the intention to share knowledge, while face gaining behavior has
a positive relationship with the intention to share knowledge. Chu
[18] argues that if people intends to save face, they will restrict
their behavior as much as possible, or even avoid to contact with
other; but for gaining face purpose, people will engage in self
expression and showing one’s merits actively.
Now return back to the results of this research. A possible
explanation for the results regarding the impact of concern for
face is that people, at least in the surveyed sample, care more
about face gaining than face saving. In other words, people’s
concern for “face” leads more face gaining behaviors than face
saving behaviors, which might be true in a competitive
environment such as a multinational company in China. In such
companies, people need to be recognized in order to gain various
opportunities such as salary raise and promotion. So in this way,
the more people care about their face, the more they would like to
gain face, so they would participate more effectively in social
related communication, because that is the way how they can
express themselves to others.
Similarly, the face gaining inclination can also explain why
people who are more adapted to organizational culture tend to
concern more about their faces. In this research, the organizations
where the respondents work are supposed to have an open, direct
and a competitive culture. Under the influence of this type of the
organizational culture, people are more likely to concern about
face gaining, so the more they are adapted to the organizational
culture, the more they will concern for face.
In this research, three factors were investigated to study their
impact on participation effectiveness in task related and social
related communication: the quality of the technology
infrastructure, language and concern for face. The results found
that both language and the quality of the technology infrastructure
show significant positive impacts on participation effectiveness in
both task related and social related communication with higher
coefficients on the latter. Concern for face only showed
significant impact on participation effectiveness in social related
communication. These results can be explained from the different
communication requirement between social-related knowledge
and task-relate knowledge. In the interviews, the interviewees
mentioned the difference between sharing social-related and taskrelated knowledge. They pointed out that social-related
knowledge is more context-based, and it often comes with more

idioms, faster talking speeds, and use of different tones. So
sharing social knowledge has a higher requirement for language
and the quality of technology infrastructure. With them, people
are willing to participate in the social-related communication
because it helps them to understand what others say more clearly
and keep the conversation smoothly.

6. IMPLICATIONS
This research has both theoretical and practical implications.
Theoretically, this work bridges the gap between knowledge
sharing, virtual teams and national culture research. Another
theoretical implication is to introduce a distinction between
national culture and national culture-in-practice. Most research on
national culture treats culture as a static construct or a stable
disposition of actors. It assumes that everybody in a specific
culture should behave in a same way. But in practice, national
culture is not functioning alone. Data analysis of this research
finds that the impact of national culture on individual’s behavior
is much more dynamic. It impacts actors’ behaviors together with
a variety of other factors such as organizational culture and
individual characteristics. In this way, individual’s understandings
of national culture, especially cultural values, are shaped by these
factors and are reinforced or modified by actions as actors engage
in practice.
The results also have practical implications for managers and team
members. Research has found that though managers have realized
the importance of culture, they find it is difficult or even
impossible to “articulate the culture-knowledge relationship in
ways that lead to action” [7]. One purpose of this research is to
explore the relationships between national culture and knowledge
sharing activities. The results of this study can therefore provide
guidelines for managers and virtual team members to manage
culture and technology to foster knowledge sharing activities in
virtual settings, which in turn will improve team effectiveness.

International conference on System Sciences. Big Island,
Hawaii. January 07 - 10.
[7] Long, D. W. D. and Fahey, L. 2000. Diagnosing Cultural
Barriers to Knowledge Management. The Academy of
Management Executive 14(4), 113-127.
[8] Evaristo, R. 2003. The Mangement of Distributed Projects
across Cultures. Journal of Global Information Management
11(4), 58-70.
[9] Cummings, J. N. 2004. Work Groups, Structural Diversity,
and Knowledge Sharing in a Global Organization.
Management Science 50(3), 352-364.
[10] Hofstede, G. 1993. Cultural Constraints in Management
Theories. Academy of Management Executive 7(1), 81-94.
[11] Karahanna, E., Evaristo, J. R. and Srite, M. 2005. Levels of
Culture and Individual Behavior: An Integrative Perspective.
Journal of Global Information Management 13(2), 1-20.
[12] Straub, D., Loch, K., Evaristo, R., Karahanna, E. and Srite,
M. 2002. Toward a Theory-based Measure of Culture.
Journal of Global Information Management 10(1), 13-23.
[13] Terpstra, V. and Sarathy, R. 2000. International Marketing.
Hinsdale, Illinois, The Dryden Press.
[14] Leung, T. K. P. and Chan, R. Y.-k. 2003. Face, Favour and
Positioning: A Chinese Power Game. European Journal of
Marketing 37(11/12), 1575-1598.
[15] Cheung, F. M., Leung, K., Zhang, J.-X., Sun, H.-F., Gan, Y.Q., Song, W.-Z. and Xie, D. 2001. Indigenous Chinese
Personality Constructs: Is the Five-Factor Model Complete?
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 32(4), 407-433.
[16] Huang, Q., Davison, R. M. and Gu, J. 2008. Impact of
Personal and Cultural factors on Knowledge Sharing in
China. Asia Pacific J Manage 25(3), 451-471.

[1] Grant, R. M. 1996. Prospering in Dynamically-competitive
Environments: Organizational Capability as Knowledge
Integration. Organization Science 7(4), 375-387.

[17] Hwang, A., Francesco, A. M. and Kessler, E. 2003. The
relationship between individualism-collectivism, face, and
feedback and learning processes in Hong Kong, Singapore,
and the United States. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology
34(1), 72-91.

[2] Constant, D., Kiesler, S. and Sproull, L. 1994. What's Mine
is Ours, or Is It? A Study of Attitudes about Information
Sharing. Information Systems Research 5(4), 400-421.

[18] Chu, R. L. 2006. Social interactions among the Chinese: On
the issue of face. Chinese Social Psychological Review. X.
Zhai. Beijing, China, Social Science Academic.

[3] Ford, D. P. and Chan, Y. E. 2003. Knowledge Sharing in a
Multi-cultural Setting: a case study. Knowledge Management
Research & Practice 1(1), 11-27.

[19] McDonough, E. F., Kahn, K. B. and Griffin, A. 1999.
Managing Communication in Global Product Development
Teams. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
46(4), 375-386.

7. REFERENCES

[4] Alavi, M. and Tiwana, A. 2002. Knowledge Integration in
Virtual Teams: the potential roles of KMS. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology
53(12), 1029-1037.
[5] Majchrzak, A., Malhotra, A. and John, R. 2005. Perceived
Individual Collaboration Know-How Development Through
Information Technology-Enabled Contextualization:
Evidence from Distributed Teams. Information Systems
Research 16(1), 9-27.
[6] Watson-Manheim, M. B., Crowston, K. and Chudoba, K. M.
2002. a New Perspective on "Virtual": Analyzing
Discontinuities in the Work Environment. 35th Hawaii

[20] Barner-Rasmussen, W. and Bor, S. 2005. Language in
multilingual organizations - a review of the management and
organization literature. 18th Scandinavian Academy of
Management. Aarhus, Denmark.
[21] Harzing, A.-W. and Feely, a. 2008. The language barrier and
its implications for HQ-subsidiary relationships. Cross
Cultural Management: An International Journal 15(1), 49-61.
[22] Voelpel, S. C. and Han, Z. 2005. Managing knowledge
sharing in China: the case of Siemens ShareNet. Journal of
Knowlegde Management 9(3), 51-63.

[23] Riopelle, K., Gluesing, J. C., Alcordo, T. C., Baba, M. L.,
Britt, D., McKether, W., Monplaisir, L., Ratner, H. H. and
Wagner, K. H. 2003. Context, Task, and the Evolution of
Technology Use in Global Virtual Teams. Virtual Teams that

Work: Creating Conditions for Virtual Team Effectiveness.
C. B. Gibson and S. G. Cohen. Hoboken, NJ, Jossey-Bass,
239-264.

Appendix 1. Brief Description of the Case Study
The case study was conducted in a Chinese site of a knowledge-intensive global corporation. English is the working language. A technical
support engineering team located in the site was selected for the study, which is from an IT department. The team has 21 employees (and
other than the two American senior managers, all are Chinese). Most of the Chinese engage in a lot of collaborative work with U.S.
colleagues. These Chinese are the main research subjects of this study. The researcher spent three months in the site as an intern from June
2006 to September 2006, which gave the researcher opportunities to attend the team meetings, observe team members’ daily work style,
and interview with them formally and informally. Content analysis was used to analyze the data from direct observation, documentation
review and interviews. A set of hypotheses were developed from the case study.
By synthesizing literature, previous research in the corporation and the results of informal interviews with team members, four cultural
dimensions were identified for the interview protocol: language, education, technology and material culture, and attitudes and values. In
this study, the perception of language impact was captured by asking team members how they feel by using English to communicate with
their American colleagues. Chinese workers mainly communicate with their U.S. colleagues through ICT, so technology infrastructure and
its use were chosen as the indicator of “technology and material culture” in the interview protocol. Since this research focuses on
knowledge sharing happened in workplace, technical knowledge one has had as a result of education was selected as the indicator of
“education”. Concern for face was chosen as the indicator of “attitudes and values”, which is because this research studies the impact of
national culture on knowledge sharing from Chinese perspective and concern for face is very deep rooted and influential in China. The
interviews focused on explore the Chinese individual’s perceptions of the impact of these cultural factors on knowledge sharing activities
in global virtual collaboration.

Appendix 2. Hypotheses Development
In the following section, I describe each empirically generated insight from the case study, seek evidence from previous literature to
explain and validate the analysis, and then propose specific hypotheses concerning the relationships between cultural factors and
knowledge sharing activities.
Language
It is evident that there are big differences between the two languages (Chinese and English) themselves. What interests the researcher is the
fact that, since English is used as the working language in the organization, how the Chinese individual’s perceptions of their English
competence affect knowledge sharing activities? Indeed, when asked about how using English as the official language influenced their
knowledge sharing activities with American colleagues, all interviewees talked about the problems created due to their English reading,
writing, listening and speaking skills. This observation regarding language difference is consistent with that of Ford and Chan [3] research.
By studying the impact of national culture on knowledge sharing in a multicultural setting, Ford and Chan found that language differences
in terms of individual’s proficiency in different languages and willingness to learn a different language can create knowledge blocks that
prevent knowledge from flowing effectively within an organization. So in this study, English competence is examined.
First, from the case study, we can see that individual’s English competence affected his or her selection of knowledge sharing tools. As
several members mentioned, they preferred reading and writing English because in that way, they had more time to think about and
organize their thinking in English before communicate with American colleagues. But in occasions that need to speak English such as in
meetings, they usually felt more difficulties in catching up others’ speaking and expressing themselves clearly.
Previous research on language differences also reflects this observation. For example, in an exploratory investigation of communication in
global product development teams, McDonough et al. [19] found that Language differences create the need for written-asynchronous
communication because it allows interacting parties to take more time to interpret and process the information exchanged.
Second, perceived English competence was also found to affect participation in knowledge sharing communications, especially when using
verbal-synchronous communication tools. As the interviewees mentioned, their English listening skills sometimes prevented them from
understanding others well. They could not go back to the context easily once they got lost during telephone meetings. They sometimes
could not use English to express the full ideas they would otherwise in Chinese. Another important factor the interviewees mentioned was
that the limitations of using English to exchange social knowledge had made their meetings dry and boring, which in turn had impacted the
communication. All these had a big negative impact on their communication with the American colleagues.
This observation is supported by research demonstrating how language differences shape communication [20]. Harzing and Feely [21] use
socio-linguistic theory to demonstrate how language barrier creates communication misunderstandings in HP-subsidiary relationships.
As a result, the following hypotheses are proposed:

H1a: The perceived English competence affects the preference for the use of different types of knowledge sharing tools in
global virtual collaboration. The more competent one’s English skills are, the less written based communication tools s/he
would like use.
H1b: The perceived English competence positively affects the effectiveness of participation in task-related communication in
global virtual collaboration.
H1c: The perceived English competence positively affects the effectiveness of participation in social-related communication in
global virtual collaboration.
Perceived Concern for Face
In the Chinese team members’ opinions, the American colleagues were less concerned for faces. They were much opener and more direct.
Among Chinese members, the perceived degree of concern for face was quite diverse. Some members perceived themselves concerned very
much for their or the others’ faces, so they did not initiate questions in order to protect their faces; While some others perceived themselves
less concerned for face, so they were actively involved in the discussions and were not afraid of losing faces. So here the perceived degree
of concern for face affects the participation in knowledge sharing communications. Another consequence from concern for face is that for
those members who are more concerned for their faces, they prefer using asynchronous tools to communicate. The reason for that is, as I
stated earlier, by doing so, they had more time to think about and organize their thinking in English before communicate with American
colleagues. In that way, they kind of protected their faces to some extent. Some other members mentioned a correlation between their
English competence and their degree of concern for face. They mentioned that they did not participate actively in a meeting because they
did not want to lose their faces by speaking English badly.
Some cross-culture research, especially those that include Chinese culture, has somehow touched the relationship between concern for face
and knowledge sharing activities qualitatively in different organizational settings. These findings support the above observation. From an
in-depth case study of Siemens ShareNet in China, Voelpel and Han [22] conclude that ‘‘concern for face’’ is one of the two cultural
aspects that negatively influence Chinese employees’ knowledge-sharing behavior. They further point out that, employees who are highly
sensitive to “face saving” and feel bad about their English abilities are reluctant to share knowledge actively.
Hence, I propose:

H2a: The perceived degree of concern for face affects the preference for the use of different types of knowledge sharing tools
in global virtual collaboration. The more one concerns for face, the less voice based tools s/he would like use.
H2b: The perceived degree of concern for face negatively affects the effectiveness of participation in task-related
communication in global virtual collaboration.
H2c: The perceived degree of concern for face negatively affects the effectiveness of participation in social-related
communication in global virtual collaboration.
H4: perceived English competence is negatively related to the perceived degree of concern for face.
Quality of Technology infrastructure
Technology infrastructure refers to the basic utilities like power, telephone and cable that make possible the communication technologies
upon which global virtual teams rely [23]. In this case, technology infrastructure was found no effect on their knowledge sharing activities.
Most interviewees thought there was no difference on technology infrastructure between their work site and the U.S. site. Two reasons
might be used to explain this observation, as I stated earlier: the first is that the Chinese site is located in the eastern China, where is rich
and has built reliable technology infrastructure. The other reason is that in this organization, major international sites mirror the size of the
U.S. sites with their large campuses of multiple buildings, and the architecture is standard from building to building. Without these two
specifications, the results might not be the same.
Although little research has empirically studied the impact of technology infrastructure on knowledge sharing activities, a few studies have
touched the relationship between the quality of technology infrastructure and communication qualitatively to some extent. For example,
Riopelle and colleagues [23] demonstrate how the reliability of electrical power and telephone circuit reliability in different countries
impact communication quality in a case study of six global virtual teams.

Hence, I propose the following hypothesis regarding the impact of the quality of technology infrastructure on knowledge sharing activities:
H3a: The quality of technology infrastructure positively affects the effectiveness of participation in task-related
communication in global virtual collaboration.
H3b: The quality of technology infrastructure positively affects the effectiveness of participation in social-related
communication in global virtual collaboration.
The very different perceptions of the degree of concern for face from different individuals indicate that it was most likely influenced by
other factors. Two antecedents were found from the case study, which are associated with the perceived degree of concern for face. They
are extraversion and the degree of adaptation to the organizational culture.
Extraversion
First, the very different perceptions of concern for face from different individuals indicate that this factor might be affected by individual
characteristics. Indeed, the word “shy” often came together with “concern for face” during interviews. Some interviewees mentioned they
were those persons that straight and open and did not care much about what others said, so they cared less about faces. Extraversion is
found to be extremely relevant in this study, which is described as assertive, active, talkative, upbeat, energetic, and optimistic.
Adaptation to organizational culture
Second, the results of the case study also revealed the important role of organizational culture in shaping individual’s perception of the
degree of concern for face. So we can expect that, team members who are more adapted to the corporate culture, are more likely to behave
in an open and direct way, which is what the corporate culture advocates. Thus, they are more likely to perceive less degree on concern for
face.
Little research has explored the impact of organizational culture on national culture in individual’s activities, but some researchers have
realized that existing culture research has been mainly conducted at a single cultural level, and begun to study the joint effect of different
levels of culture theoretically [11, 12].
Hence, I propose:
H5a: Extraversion is negatively associated the perceived degree of concern for face in global virtual collaboration.
H5b: The degree of adaptation to organizational culture is negatively associated with the perceived degree of concern for face in
global virtual collaboration.

