The Rich Get Richer: Studying Scholarly Impact in the
Emerging Field of Information Visualization
Weimao Ke
School of Information and Library Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

wke@unc.edu
ABSTRACT
The paper reports on an investigation of the-rich-get-richer
effect of scholarly communication in the emerging field of
Information Visualization. A dataset containing 31 years’
representative publications is used to analyze scholarly impact in terms of citation scores. Rich factors, i.e., variables
that carry previous citation scores, are closely examined and
their contributions to future citations measured. Based on
previous research on citation patterns, a general log-linear
regression model is proposed and applied to the prediction
of scholarly impact using the rich factors. The analysis supports the “preferential attachment” property, or the-rich-getricher phenomenon, in citation networks and reveals that
the number of citations one has received largely explains
the magnitude of future rewards. The implication is that
citation-based evaluation of scholarly impact is biased. The
large coefficient of determination (R2 ) found in the current
analysis, to be verified in other domains, is too significant
to ignore. This invites thoughts on how Information Science
domains like InfoVis can maintain research momentum by
rewarding recognized scholars while encouraging new players
and novelty.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.0 [Information Systems]: MODELS AND PRINCIPLES—General

General Terms
Measurement, Verification

Keywords
scholarly impact, citation analysis, the rich get richer, regression, citation network, preferrential attachment

1.

INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE

Among measures used to analyze various facets of written
communication, citations are considered fair indicators of
use and usefulness of publications [7]. Citation analysis

has been widely used to evaluate research productivity and
scholarly impact [3].
Previous research on network science [1] and citation analysis [8] proposed that citation networks are small-world networks and subject to “preferential attachment.” These networks are scale free – that is, they have a distribution of
connectivities that decays with a power law function [1]. In
another word, the majority are rarely cited and extremely
“poor” whereas highly-cited nodes, i.e., influential publications or scholars, tend to be cited even more – the rich get
richer.
The-rich-get-richer effect has various potential implications
in the development of a field and requires further empirical investigation. This study, as a priliminary step, aims
to verify the the-rich-get-richer effect by directly measuring
the “rich” and the “richer” in the emerging field of Information Visualization. It sets out to discover what the “rich”
factors are in existing data and whether they help scholarly
publications “get richer” over time. A prediction model for
scholarly impact will be proposed and applied in the field to
evaluate the existence and significance of the effect.

2.

DATA COLLECTION

Data come from the IEEE Information Visualization 2004
Contest, now part of the InfoVis Benchmark Repository
[6]. The dataset contains major publications and citations
within the field over a 31-year period, i.e., from 1974 to
2004, retrieved from the ACM Digital Library. The publication metadata come with title, authors, abstract, keywords,
source, references, number of pages, and year of publication.
After data cleaning, the dataset contains 613 publications
with 1,036 unique authors/scholars and 8,502 references to
papers within and without the set.

3.

MEASURING IMPACT

Surely, it is difficult to define and measure impact precisely.
For simplicity and data availability, the number of citations
one has received is used as an indicator of scholarly impact.
In this analysis, a paper’s # citations: Cpaper|i = # papers
that cite paper i. This citation score is then divided equally
among its authors, i.e., Cscholar|ij = Cpaper|i /ni for author
j of paper i where ni is the number of authors of the paper.

3.1

Scale-free Citation Network

Research proposed that the-rich-get-richer effect appears in
networks that follow a power-law distribution, that is, the

probability P (k) that a node in the network connects with
k other nodes (e.g., cited by k other papers in a citation
network) is roughly proportional to k−γ [1]. This type of
network is called scale-free because the network structure is
independent of its scale of size.
Figure 1 (a) and (b) show distributions of # citations to
scholars and publications in the dataset on log-log coordinates, where the X axis denotes citation scores and Y
frequencies of the scores. Both figures show a power-law
pattern – a roughly linear decreasing trend on log-log coordinates.

p
β

yi = (β0∗ ∗

xijj ) ∗

∗

(1)

j=1

where ∗ is the stochastic disturbance or error term. Applying log function to the both sides of the equation:

p

log(yi )

β

= log((β0∗ ∗

xijj ) ∗

∗

)

(2)

j=1

For instance, on Figure 1 (a) the distribution of paper citation scores, when X (citation score) is very small (e.g.,
1), Y (frequency) is extremely large. That means, the vast
majority of the papers have very small citation scores. On
the other hand, when X (citation score) is extremely large,
Y (frequency) is very small, meaning that only a tiny portion of the papers have obtained large citation scores. In
another word, very few are extremely rich and the majority
are extremely poor.

p

= log(β0∗ ) +

(βj ∗ log(xij )) + log( ∗ ) (3)
j=1

Let log(βo∗ ) be β0 and log( ∗ ) be , the model becomes:

p

(βj ∗ log(xij )) +

log(yi ) = β0 +

(4)

500

●

100

200

This is a linear regression model for the log-transformed variables. Using generalized linear regression models [5] will allow estimation of the β coefficients, i.e., elasticity of each
independent variable’s contribution to citations.

●

50

●

●

●

20

●

10

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

2
2

5

10

20

50

k (citation score)

(a) paper citation

100

●
● ●● ● ●

●

1

1

2

●

1

5. “RICH” FACTORS

●
● ●● ●

5

F(k) (# scholars with the citation score)

500
200
100
50
20
10
5

F(k) (# papers with the citation score)

j=1

1

2

5

10

●
●●
●
●●
●●● ●
● ●
● ●
● ●

20

50

100

●● ●●

200

500

k (citation score)

(b) scholar citation

Figure 1: Power-law distributions of citation scores
(straight lines a reference to the eye)

3.2

Log Transformation of Citation Scores

The linear distributions on log-log coordinates suggest a log
transformation of citation scores. Preliminary analysis using the Box-cox test [2] also supports the usefulness of a log
transformation. As we will see in Section 5, most of the
predictor variables will involve previous # citations in various ways. Therefore, log-transformation of x (independent)
variables also appears reasonable. All this leads to the use
of a log-linear regression model in Section 4.

4.

MODEL

The objective of the study is to build a model for scholarly impact and to use regression analysis to study the-richget-richer effect. As suggested in the discussion above, log
transformation of dependent and independent variables is
desirable for this model, which is presented below.
Let yi be the number of citations of an observation (paper) i.
Suppose we have independent variables xij ∈ [xi1 , xi2 , .., xip ]
where p is the number of independent variables. The proposed model is:

A set of candidate rich factors will be discussed below and
used for the model. By “rich,” the study refers to variables
that carried a certain amount of previous citations associated with the publication being analyzed.

5.1

Rich Factor Selection

In citation networks, the-rich-get-richer proposal implies that
a highly cited paper will get more citations in the future.
Scholars who have been well recognized will attract particular attention and get cited even more. Similarly, high impact journals will continue to dominate. In addition, scholarly references often indicate knowledge flows from the cited
publications to the current work. Publications that attach
to the rich ones by referring to them might potentially become richer.
All this has suggested as predictor variables the previous impact factors (the richness) of authors, publication venue, and
referred works of a paper (see Section 5.3 for the variables).
The model also has to include a time factor, i.e., age of
a publication, because obviously citations accumulate over
time.

5.2

Aging Effect

Research has shown that a citation decay curve over time
consists of two parts, as shown in Figure 2 (a): 1) an increase of citations during first couple of years, followed by
2) gradual decline of citations when the paper gets older [4].
Its cumulative form is shown in Figure 2 (b). For model simplicity and consistency, this study uses the functional form
of τ β , where τ is age and β an exponent to be estimated,
to model accumulative citations. Although this is not the

Cum
mulativve C(t))

perfect way to model the aging effect, it does capture the
decaying pattern of citations over time (see Figure 2 (b)).
This also fits in well with the entire model, in which the
exponent β can be estimated using log-linear regression.

Schematic form
C(t) = tβ approximation

t0

(a) schematic form

t

(b) cumulative approximation

Figure 2: Citation aging & approximation

5.3

Variables

Previous discussions suggested the following variables with
hypotheses stated in Section 6. Dependent variable: logCite
- Citation score of a publication as of year 2004. Independent variables: 1) logAuthCite - Previous1 citations to authors, 2) logRef Cite - Previous1 citations to referred works,
3) logV nCite - Average previous1 citations to publication
venue, and 4) logAge - Age of publication as of year 2004.
Note that it was in 2004 the data were collected and all
variables will be log transformed.

6.

Table 1: Scholarly Impact: Parameter Estimates
Variable
DF β Est StdErr
t
P r > |t|
Intercept
1
-0.335
0.050 -6.7 4.3E −11 ∗ ∗ ∗
logAuthCite
1
0.326
0.020 16.3 < 2E −16 ∗ ∗ ∗
logVnCite
1
0.081
0.037
2.2
0.026 ∗
logRefCite
1
0.040
0.014
2.9
0.004 ∗∗
logAge
1
0.573
0.048 11.9 < 2E −16 ∗ ∗ ∗
Signif. codes: 0 ‘∗ ∗ ∗’ 0.001 ‘∗∗’ 0.01 ‘∗’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 0.238 on 608 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-Squared: 0.4726, Adjusted R-squared: 0.4691
F-statistic: 136.2 on 4 and 608 DF, p-value: < 2.2E −16

HYPOTHESES

H1: A paper that refers to more famous/highly-cited works
potentially attracts more citations.
H2: The more previous citations to a paper’s authors, the
more may the paper’s future citations be.
H3: The more prestigious the venue in which a paper is published, the more citations will the paper gain in the future.

8.

CONCLUSION

This study builds a regression model for scholarly impact
and uses a dataset containing 31 years of publications to
test the-rich-get-richer effect. Results support the claim
that success tends to breed success in scholarly communication and that the small number of rich factors (predictor
variables) explained a large portion of variance in citation
scores. The implication is that citation-based evaluation of
scholarly impact is biased. The large coefficient of determination (R2 ) found in the current analysis, to be verified
in other domains, is too significant to ignore. This invites
thoughts on how a domains like InfoVis can maintain research momentum by rewarding recognized scholars while
encouraging new players and novelty.

Acknowledgments
I appreciate helpful discussions with Thomas Carsey, Frank
Acito, Paul Solomon, John Paolillo and Javed Mostafa, and
valuable comments from Cassidy R. Sugimoto, Jeff Harden,
Ellen Gutman, Xi Niu and anonymous reviewers.

9.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Albert and A.-L. Barabasi. Statistical mechanics of
complex networks. Reviews of Modern Physics,
74(1):47–97, 2002.
H4: Number of citations of a paper accumulates over time.
[2] G. E. P. Box and D. R. Cox. An analysis of
transformations. Journal of the Royal Statistical
7. RESULTS
Society, 26(2):211–252, 1964.
Regressing logCite against logAuthCite, logRef Cite, logV nCite,
[3] B. Cronin and K. Overfelt. Citation-based auditing of
and logAge produces the results in Table 1, which shows
academic performance. Journal of the American Society
all significant coefficients and supports the four hypothefor Information Science, 45(2):61–72, 1994.
ses. The more previous citations a paper’s authors have re[4] B. M. Gupta. Analysis of distribution of the age of
ceived, the more citations the paper will gain in the future.
citations in theoretical population genetics.
A paper that refers to more highly-cited works potentially
Scientometrics, 40(1):139–162, September 1997.
attracts more citations. The established impact of a pub[5] M. H. Kutner, C. J. Nachtsheim, and J. Neter. Applied
lication venue also has a positive effect on future citation
Linear Regression Models. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, revised
scores.
edition, 2004.
Although both AuthCite and Ref Cite have positive coeffi[6] C. Plaisant, J. Fekete, and G. Grinstein. Promoting
cients, AuthCite seems to contribute more toward citation
insight based evaluation of visualizations: From contest
scores (exponent 0.325 vs. 0.0395). For example, when the
to benchmark repository. Technical report, HCIL,
previous citation score to authors increases 100% (doubled),
University of Maryland, 2004.
while holding the other variables constant, the expected ci[7] A. Pritchard. Statistical bibliography or bibliometrics?
tation score of a paper will increase 20.325 − 1 = 0.2527, or
Journal of Documentation, 25:348–349, 1969.
about 25%. Referring to good works does help the current
[8] S. Redner. How popular is your paper? an empirical
work get more citations, but to a limited extent. People
study of the citation distribution. The European
seem to pay more attention to works written by prestigious
Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex
scholars than works that refer to influential others.
Systems, 4(2):131–134, July 1998.
1
Previous refers to the time before a paper was published.

