The FCC’s “White Spaces” decision and its implications
for iSchools
Martin Weiss
School of Information Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh PA 15260
+1 412 624 9430

mbw@pitt.edu
ABSTRACT
New technologies can have a significant impact on what we teach
and what we do in an iSchool. In this paper, I describe how a new
infrastructure option has emerged for information systems and
services. The FCC’s “White Spaces” decision involved a large
segment of what used to be the NII (National Information
Infrastructure) community, a community of considerable affinity
to iSchools. In this paper, I argue that this decision is of broad
interest to iSchools because: (1) it is a case study that highlights
how policy decisions and technology developments interact with
each other and (2) many aspects of the follow-up to this decision
fall squarely in the domain of iSchools, from the development of
white space devices, to building systems to utilize these devices,
to building information services to communities that are currently
underserved.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
A.m

General Terms
Management, Economics, Legal Aspects.

Keywords
FCC, Telecommunications, Cognitive Radio, Spectrum, Policy

1. INTRODUCTION
While most of the country was busy casting ballots on November
4, 2008, the US Federal Communications Commission ruled that
“white spaces” in the television band were available for
unlicensed use on a non-interfering basis.
While not without
controversy, the White Spaces Decision has a significant potential
to transform the communications industry and is thus relevant to
iSchools.
The white spaces decision has its origins in the wireless
revolution, which caused industry participants to explore new
approaches to gaining access to radio spectrum that had become
more costly and/or congested. Measurements showed that much
of the spectrum that had been assigned was underutilized, leading
to proposals on how this spectrum might be used more efficiently.
Concurrently, advances in microelectronics, software systems,
and communications technology led to the emergence of new
types of communications systems, such as ultra-wideband
(UWB), software-defined radios (SDRs) and cognitive radios.
Without delving into the details of these technologies, these
systems largely shared the characteristic that advances in and
deployment of these systems required actions on the part of the
civil sector spectrum administration agency, the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC). The “White Spaces”

decision is the outcome of one of those explorations – the use of
cognitive radio technology to improve electromagnetic spectrum
utilization through opportunistic use.
It is often the case that innovation in information system design
and implementation requires one or more specific policy actions
to enable further development. The white spaces decision
discussed in this paper is an excellent example of such a situation
– serious commercial development and deployment of devices
would not proceed without an enabling policy action. Because of
the competing interests, policy action is often difficult because
entrenched interest (or incumbents) have a concern about the
deleterious effects of this decision. Thus, agencies must often
gather data to assuage these concerns, which can require testing
prototype systems, which requires significant investments on the
part of the proponents. Thus, we have a cycle of incremental
commitment on the part of stakeholders. The white spaces
decision is an excellent example of innovation that requires
government engagement, and could be a good teaching case to
illustrate how and why information system innovation may
require engagement in the policymaking process.
But the relevance of this decision extends beyond its use as a
classroom case to research opportunities for iSchools. There are
many opportunities for applying this emergent technology to
information systems, especially since, as I argue below, the best
application may be in (underserved) rural areas. Cognitive radio
technology is still new, so there are still considerable technical
research opportunities, as well as systems research opportunities,
since cognitive radios have the capability to act in response to
environmental changes.
Finally, there are many new research areas that are created in the
general domain of interest of iSchools when we consider these
kinds of devices. An example of this kind of research is presented
to stimulate our thinking and conversation.

2. BACKGROUND
Early in this decade, the US Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) began exploring ways in which
electromagnetic spectrum might be used more effectively. There
were several products of that effort, the earliest being the
Spectrum Policy Task Force (SPTF) report [1]. In this report, all
under- or un-utilized spectrum were referred to as “white spaces”.
The SPTF provides a fairly comprehensive discussion of
alternatives that might be used individually or in concert to
improve spectrum utilization, such as secondary use, opportunistic
use, underlay rights, spectrum markets, etc. to utilize these white
spaces.

The FCC followed up this report with several dockets exploring
some of the more promising approaches identified by the SPTF.
In 2002, the FCC released a Notice of Inquiry (NOI) in which
comment was sought on using a particular group of these white
spaces, those in the broadcast television band [2]. In this NOI, the
FCC was “seeking comment on the possibility of allowing
unlicensed devices to operate in the TV broadcast bands at
locations and times when the spectrum is not being used by
authorized services.” The rationale for this inquiry was:
“The Commission noted that unused portions of the TV
spectrum appear to be a suitable choice for expanded
unlicensed operations. In this regard, the Commission
observed that there is significant bandwidth available
because each TV channel occupies six megahertz and
multiple channels are generally vacant or unused in a
particular area. The Commission stated that allowing
unlicensed devices to operate on unused TV channels
would lead to more efficient use of the spectrum.”
This was followed up with a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
(NPRM) [3], based on the feedback received from the NOI in
which the FCC detailed a specific approach to using these TV
white spaces. Finally, on November 4, 2008, the FCC issued an
Order that paved the way for the unlicensed use of the “TV White
Spaces” spectrum [4].
As might be expected, the NOI and the NPRM were embraced by
some parties, but not others. While it is beyond the scope of this
paper to provide a detailed and nuanced analysis of the Comments
and Reply Comments, it soon became clear that several key
stakeholder groups emerged:
The broadcast industry, which generally opposed this
approach, fearing interference by these “opportunistic”
devices, especially at the margins of their viewing areas.
The Internet-based service providers generally favored
this approach, as it provided opportunities for
innovation and for bypassing the broadband access
market, which is costly to enter.
The entertainment industry and providers of equipment
for that industry, which generally opposed this approach
because the wireless microphones that many stage
entertainers use also operate in these frequencies.
Rural wireless ISPs, which favored this approach
because the electromagnetic spectrum in the television
band was favorable for their application and less
congested than the existing unlicensed spectrum.
Equipment manufacturers and software developers, who
were generally in favor of this approach, as it provided
new potential markets.
There was also a debate about whether this spectrum should be
auctioned or treated as unlicensed spectrum. Many technology
industry participants were in favor of using these as unlicensed
(see, generally, the Wireless Innovation Alliance), and some
prominent telecommunications economists advocated auctioning
this spectrum [5]. Hazlett urged abandoning broadcast television
entirely and auctioning the spectrum, avoiding the discussion of
television white spaces altogether [6].
In order to alleviate the concerns of some of the stakeholders, the
FCC required that they use “smart” radio technology that is

capable of identifying “the unused TV channels in the area they
are located”. These radios, also called cognitive radios, are
leading edge devices that, for the most part, exist as prototypes in
research laboratories. To evaluate whether these radios would be
capable of performing as needed, the FCC’s Office of Engineering
and Technology conducted extensive tests of manufacturer’s
prototypes [7]. Five prototype radios were provided for these
tests, which were conducted at nine locations outside of the
laboratory. These tests showed that the devices were usually able
to detect the presence of both Digital Television (DTV) signals
and wireless microphones to very low levels.

2.1 Cognitive radios
The idea of cognitive radios was first proposed by Mitola [8], and
subsequent research was summarized in [9]. In a nutshell,
cognitive radios are designed to sense their environment,
determine whether (or how) the environment matches the
application requirement, and, if possible, configure the radio to
utilize the environment as long as it is available. If the
environment changes, the cognitive radio would respond by
reconfiguring themselves to adapt to the new environment. Since
these new radios have to work with incumbent devices, the use of
signaling between the (incumbent) license holder and the
opportunistic user cannot be assumed. Signaling of this kind
greatly simplifies interference avoidance.
It turns out that spectrum sensing, especially when the signals are
weak and unknown, is a difficult technical problem. Limiting the
devices to the television band simplifies this problem somewhat,
in that the signal characteristics of television are known and the
sensing bandwidth is limited to the TV band. Sensing in the TV
band is also simplified because we know where the (licensed)
transmitters are and what their signal power is. Thus, we know
where to look and what signal level that we might expect.
Spectrum sensing is made more difficult because a radio may be
located in place that is in the “shadow” of an obstacle (like a
building)1. This is a problem because some stations that the radio
is communicating with may not be in the shadow and would thus
be subject to unwanted interference. Dealing with hidden nodes
like this may require the cooperation of radios in the region. This
cooperative sensing generally improves the sensing of cognitive
radios, and requires a communication protocol to enable the radios
to share information. One of the interesting research directions is
to discover the bounds of (truthful) information sharing when the
radios are selfish.

2.2 Characteristics of spectrum use
Radio spectrum and its use have some unique characteristics that
deserve mention when considering white spaces. Chief among
them are propagation and practical aspects of receivers.
Radio waves propagate mostly as a ground wave2. At lower
frequencies, radio waves can refract around buildings, can travel
over the horizon, and propagate well through the walls of
buildings. As the frequencies become higher, refraction becomes
more limited, as does the radio wave’s ability to propagate over
the horizon and through building walls. It turns out that signal
attenuation also increases with frequency, so that higher
1

Such a radio is known as a “hidden node”.

2

At some frequencies, radio waves also propagate as a sky wave,
in which the signal is “bounced” off of the upper atmospheric
layers, resulting in extraordinarily long propagation.

frequency signals have more limited range than lower frequency
ones. To overcome this increasing attenuation, the signal power is
often concentrated into a narrower beam using a directional
antenna so that reasonable distances can still be achieved.
The propagation characteristics of signals from 700MHz to about
3GHz are generally considered near optimal from a propagation
perspective. Thus, they are highly sought after and are used for
applications that include television and mobile telephones. If the
television band had been located in a less desirable band, it is
likely that we would not have seen such a concerted push for the
right to use this spectrum opportunistically.
It is also useful to keep in mind some practical aspects of radio
system design because it has a significant impact on the way in
which spectrum is used. Most radio systems of the kind that we
envision for white spaces devices are duplex (two-way). Thus,
they usually have a separate radio channel for communication in
each direction (uplink and downlink). To minimize interference
between these two channels, it is normally desirable to locate
them at significantly different frequencies to avoid interference
between these channels without the use of costly filters. As a
result, most communications systems prefer a “band plan” that
consists of two “paired” channels, each being sufficiently large to
support the application’s requirements.

3. ALTERNATIVES TO WHITE SPACE
DEVICES
Cognitive radios, also called White Space Devices (WSDs), exist
in a continuum of spectrum access options, as described by
Buddhikot [10]. On one extreme, we find unlicensed devices that
share spectrum, such as WiFi. On the other extreme, we find
licensed devices that use exclusive spectrum. Basically, users are
faced with a choice of making a tradeoff between price and
quality; with shared spectrum unlicensed devices, users obtain
uncertain quality at zero price while with licensed devices, users
obtain certain quality at a price greater than zero.
WSDs in the television spectrum are unlicensed, so they are close
to the WiFi end of the continuum. But because
WSDs have better sensors (to mitigate interference with
license holders),
WSDs may communicate with each other to coordinate
spectrum usage,
there is (potentially) so much more spectrum available,
we may anticipate higher quality than might be expected of WiFi
devices.
Another alternative technology is WiMAX, which boasts higher
speeds and longer transmission distances than WiFi. The
WiMAX services that are emerging in the US are from the
Sprint/Clearwire partnership. These do not have zero price, and
since spectrum is shared, the quality is also not certain, though
quality can be managed by the service provider.

4. WHAT IS THE EXPECTED IMPACT OF
THIS DECISION?
Since devices that might use these white spaces are still in the
prototype stage, the immediate impact will be minimal. As these
devices become available, we will gradually see service providers
building systems on these technologies. For reference purposes,
the FCC distinguishes mobile devices from fixed services.
Mobile services have lower power thresholds (and hence shorter

transmission distances) than fixed services because the chance of
interference from mobile devices is higher.
I believe that the initial applications will be for fixed radio
systems. There are three major reasons for this. First, since the
power required by cognitive radios is still significant, access to
the electric grid will be important in the near term. Second, the
spectrum sensing/detection time varies from less than a second to
two minutes in the FCC test devices [7]. Long spectrum
acquisition times are inconsistent with the mobile environment.
Finally, fixed devices can transmit at a higher power level.
Studies indicate that the amount of spectrum in the white spaces
varies considerably [11]. In general, it is fair to say that the
availability of white spaces is much more limited in urban areas
than in rural areas. A careful analysis of this question has been
done by Brown and Sicker [12]. They conclude that the biggest
likely beneficiaries of these systems would be rural communities,
where the general availability of white spaces is high and the
relatively long propagation characteristics in the UHF band are
well suited to the low population densities in these areas.
Furthermore, they point out that fewer broadband access options
exist, which also serves to make WSD-based access more
attractive. To the extent that white spaces are available in urban
areas, available spectrum is far more fragmented than in rural
areas and may not cover an entire metro area.
But even in urban areas where white space spectrum is available,
the emergence of devices that can take advantage of this spectrum
means that users of unlicensed wireless systems, like those based
on Wi-Fi, can expect better performance. Some industry
observers expect a wave of innovation in broadband access (see,
for example, [13]), even though the economic models for
deploying these new access networks remains unclear (we present
some research results below that begin to address this question).
The application of “smart antenna” technology can do much to
enhance the feasibility of white space devices. This technology
allows for rich spatial diversity. Thus, many devices in the same
geographic area will be able to use the same frequency resource
without interference.

5. WHAT, IF ANYTHING, DOES THIS
MEAN FOR iSCHOOLS?
Broadband access has been an area of interest in many iSchools
for some time, though often for different reasons. More
technologically oriented iSchools would have an interest in
exploring the technical aspects of building white spaces devices;
more systems oriented iSchools would have an interest in
considering the new options offered by these devices; and more
service oriented iSchools would have an interest in considering
and evaluating the extent to which these systems could provide
new opportunities to meet the community’s information needs.

5.1 Illustrating information systems
innovation
It is incumbent on us, as teaching faculty, to give our students a
deeper appreciation of the policy context of information systems.
Policy matters because it can drive the requirements of
information systems, drive the behavior of these systems, and,
guide innovations in this domain. In the introduction, I showed
how the white spaces decision was an exemplar of the latter – to

enable further development of this technology, changes in
government policy were necessary.

5.2 Technology research
There are many opportunities for technology research in white
spaces. This is particularly true since there are no commercial
devices yet. While some of the basic technologies that are
required for implementation and product launch will (and should)
be accomplished by equipment manufacturers, there are still many
research opportunities for universities that have iSchools. These
include:
Innovation in cognitive radio design for white spaces
Innovation in spectrum assignment, including secondary
use markets, spectrum trading markets, and markets in
interference rights
Improving the energy efficiency of cognitive radios for
mobile devices
Reducing the chance of interference by improvements
in detection, including:
o Using exogenous information to improve
detector performance
o Optimal cooperation among cognitive radios
(even those that might be competing for the
same white space spectrum)
Economics of cognitive radios and intelligent radio
systems
Behaviour of systems of WSDs, i.e., cooperation,
collusion, and competition of potentially selfish devices
Using white spaces effectively in urban environments,
which may constitute new approaches in power control
and/or intelligent antenna systems (such as MIMO).

5.3 Applications and systems
When new technologies enter the marketplace, the opportunities
to apply the new technology multiply. While there is nothing new
about broadband access, there is something new about broadband
that has the characteristics of white space devices. Because of the
uncertain nature of the available spectrum, the system could be
subject to significant variations in available bandwidth, depending
on the system’s location. Because the radios themselves have
significant processing capabilities and are able to respond to their
environment, it becomes important to understand the behavior of
systems of intelligent radios.

5.4 Services
The proponents of unlicensed use of white space devices have
high hopes for providing services to communities of that are
currently either underserved or unserved. The greatest promise
for white space based systems is in rural areas, as I remarked
above. Thus, it is conceivable that a new broadband capability
could be deployed in these areas.
In most cases, rural
communities have less access to libraries, information services
and medical systems. Because of the availability of broadband
systems capable of propagating long distances, it may be feasible
to deploy a new generation of public safety communication
system that can provide not just dispatch-oriented voice
communication, but a system capable of data, image and video
communication that can help reduce the response time of first
responders.

6. SOME RELATED RESEARCH RESULTS
The iSchool at Pitt has research capabillities that are service,
technology and application oriented. Research in alternatives to
spectrum access has been going on at Pitt for most of this decade,
though it has not been in unlicensed WSDs like those that were
approved by the FCC in the November decision. Nonetheless,
some of the research results that have been obtained can inform
about some of the possible impacts of WSDs and can serve as an
example to illustrate what is possible at an iSchool.
In [14], we report on the results of a project that studied secondary
spectrum use. Unlike unlicensed WSDs, this paper was studying
a system in which secondary users would purchase temporary
usage rights from license holders on a market. So, while the
details of the study are different in significant ways from
unlicensed WSDs, the overall context was similar.
To aid in understanding the results, it is necessary to say a bit
more about the details of the model. First of all, Agent-based
Computational Economics (ACE) is a “bottom up” tool that is
being used by some economists to observe market outcomes
without some of the sometimes restrictive assumptions that have
to be made in analytical economics.
When using ACE,
researchers create software agents that are capable of interacting
with each other. These interactions include buying and selling
goods, bidding in auctions, etc. Researchers can control the rules
that govern the interactions (market rules) and the behavior of
agents. ACE researchers can collect a variety of data about the
interactions (such as prices paid, choices made), which can then
be used to gain insight into the effects of certain behavioral and
market rules.
In our analysis, we were interested in incorporating technological
parameters (such as propagation and quality of service) as well as
some behavior ones (such as bounded rationality and
opportunism). The latter set were included because we wanted to
be able to study the bounds within which such a market would be
feasible; given the realities of today’s wireless marketplace, the
ability to model the consequences of a small number of license
holders was important.
While it is relatively easy to see how license holders could benefit
from monetizing unused spectrum through secondary use,
understanding the behavior of secondary users is a bit more
challenging. In our model, we allow secondary users to choose
between unlicensed use, secondary use, and license acquisition.
Secondary use rights are purchased at an auction, where multiple
primary and secondary users might be competing. In the results
being reported here, we examine how these choices were made
under different circumstances. These included the number of
consumers, the size of the area being covered, and the sensitivity
to quality (represented by differing values of ). Figure 1
illustrates what users choose when secondary use is added as an
access option.
This figure, which models 13 simulated consumers and 19 license
holders – a medium-sized scenario – presents several different
results:
Each group of six bars represents a coverage area of
different size, from 250 to 1000 meters.
Each column within a coverage area shows the
outcomes with different degrees of sensitivity to quality,
from less to more as you move from left to right.

The cross-hatched bars represent results when
secondary use is permitted and the clear bars show the
results that obtain without secondary use.
Color represents the choices made by secondary users,
where
o red represents users that chose to acquire
licenses,
o blue represents users that chose unlicensed
use, and
o green represents users that chose secondary
use.

numbers of either are small, secondary use is not chosen. When
the number of providers (license holders) is small, opportunism
prevails and users make other choices. When the number of
consumers (secondary users) is small, then unlicensed is an
attractive option.

Figure 2 - User behavior at lower user densities

Figure 1 - Impact of secondary use on user behavior

This figure suggests that we might expect secondary use to be
evolutionary. That is, as more users enter the market, we might
expect an increasing number to choose secondary use.
Furthermore, a move away from unlicensed WSDs to a marketbased approach would require the active participation of sufficient
license holders to be successful.

Clearly, without secondary use, users were divided into either
unlicensed or licensed use. When secondary use was permitted,
our results show that adding secondary use completely eliminates
the demand for licenses, as users have cheaper access options with
equivalent quality. This could result in lower prices at auction for
spectrum licenses.
The choice that users make also depends on their sensitivity to
quality and the coverage area. Not surprisingly, as the user’s
sensitivity to quality increases, their willingness to choose
unlicensed decreases, even when secondary use is added.
Similarly, we see that larger coverage areas result in fewer users
choosing unlicensed spectrum. This is because the chance of
interference increases with the service area, so the quality
decreases as the service area increases.
Although the model did not explicitly consider unlicensed WSDs,
this result has has relevance. While the price for spectrum is zero
for both WiFi unlicensed service and WSDs, it is reasonable to
assume that WSDs will be more costly than WiFi devices, so they
represent the same kind of cost/quality tradeoff faced by the users
in our modelled scenario. Thus, the introduction of unlicensed
WSDs will provide more options for users and simultaneously
should reduce the demand for licensed spectrum.
While we did not model rural use explicitly, we can get a sense of
this scenario by examining user behavior at lower user densities.
Figure 2 is like Figure 1 with only five secondary users and 19
license holders. We can see that relatively more users choose
unlicensed service for all coverage areas. This is expected, given
that the interference would be lower for smaller numbers of users.
If we allow the number of license holders and secondary users to
vary, we obtain the result that is shown in Figure 3. When the

Figure 3 - Secondary use as a function of the number of
primary and secondary users
In the TV bands affected by the White Spaces order, the marketbased secondary use and the unlicensed use of white spaces are
largely disjoint phenomena. The unlicensed WSDs covered in the
FCC’s Order would exist in geographic, temporal and spectral
regions outside of the television broadcaster’s license, so the
broadcaster would not have license rights in these regions
anyway. Thus, the market-based secondary use that was examined
in this research could emerge in conjunction with unlicensed
WSDs if broadcasters found it more valuable to lease spectrum to
secondary users at certain times of day than to use it for television
broadcasts.
While this scenario seems unlikely if one considers a
broadcaster’s entire viewing area, it could be much more likely if
we imagine an area within the broadcaster’s license domain where

cable television subscriptions are very high. Since the broadcaster
would not lose market share by sub-leasing spectrum in this area
to secondary use, they may find a secondary use transaction
financially superior. This would require changes in public policy,
however, since broadcasters have limited ability to use this
spectrum for purposes beyond its allocation.

7. CONCLUSIONS
One of the distinguishing features of many iSchools is a systemsoriented approach. A key variable of this view is the context of a
system – government policy is often a key contextual element.
But government policy can go beyond this to shaping what is
possible. Helping our students achieve a richer understanding of
the role of policy in information systems is often best achieved by
constructing teaching cases (or, at least, developed examples).
The FCC “White Spaces” decision is an excellent exemplar of this
kind of teaching case. Without explicit public action, it would
have been a poor investment on the part of researchers in academe
and industry to focus on cognitive radio, as it would have
remained at the idea stage. Thus, it would have been moot to
consider the cost/performance combination that these systems
may offer in the future. Because of the FCC’s interest in this
(culminating in their Nov. 4 Order), numerous corporations have
invested in building prototype WSDs, some of which have been
demonstrated at the Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
(DySPAN) conferences. While they are still in the early
development stage, it is not too early to re-imagine the
information systems and services that might use them.
From a research perspective, WSDs and the associated
technologies offer a rich set of opportunities in the domain of
iSchools. The technologies themselves and their implementation
details (eg. markets) require more study. Also, since these
devices offer new tradeoffs in cost, quality and coverage, these
WSDs may offer new opportunities for service delivery at prices
and performance levels that were impossible before. For iSchool
researchers, this means that capabilities such as telemedicine in
rural areas may now be feasible and cost effective where it once
was not.
Beyond that, iSchools can, and should, be leaders in implementing
and making use of this new, emergent technology. There are
many opportunities across the traditional domains of iSchools that
may benefit from considering this new class of devices. I invite
you to join me in thinking through and acting on these emerging
research opportunities.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Spectrum Policy Task Force Report. Federal
Communications Commission ET Docket No. 02-135.
November 2002.
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC228542A1.pdf .
[2] Federal Communications Commission. In the Matter of
Additional Spectrum for Unlicensed Devices Below 900
MHz and in the 3 GHz Band. ET Docket 02-380. December
11, 2002.
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-02328A1.pdf.

[3] Federal Communications Commission. In the Matter of
Unlicensed Operation in the TV Broadcast Bands and
Additional Spectrum for Unlicensed Devices Below 900
MHz and in the 3 GHz band. Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking. FCC 04-113. May 13, 2004.
http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-04113A1.pdf.
[4] Federal Communications Commission. In the Matter of
Unlicensed Operation in the TV Broadcast Bands and
Additional Spectrum for Unlicensed Devices Below 900
MHz and in the 3 GHz band. Second Report and Order and
Memorandum Opinion and Order. FCC 08-260. November 4,
2008.
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-08260A1.pdf .
[5] Comments of Charles L. Jackson, Dorothy Robyn and
Coleman Bazelton in WT Docket 06-150 and PS Docket 06229, June 20, 2008.
[6] Hazlett, T. Don’t Let Google Freeze the Airwaves. Wall
Street Journal. October 3, 2008. See also
http://arstechnica.com/articles/culture/dtv-transition-toyesterday.ars.
[7] Jones, S.K., Phillips, T.W., Van Tuyl, H.L., and Weller, R.D.
Evaluation of the Performance of Prototype TV-Band White
Space Devices, Phase II. FCC OET Report 08-TR-1005.
October 15, 2008.
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-082243A3.pdf
[8] Mitola, J. Cognitive radio – model-based competence for
software radios. Licentiate Thesis. KTH. Stockholm.
September 1999.
[9] Akyildiz, I.F., Lee, W.L., Vuran, M.C., and Mohanty, S.
NeXt generation/dynamic spectrum access/cognitive radio
wireless networks: A survey. Computer Networks 50 (2006),
2127-2159.
[10] Buddhikot, M. Understanding Dynamic Spectrum Access:
Models, Taxonomy and Challenges. 2nd International IEEE
Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access
Networks (DySPAN 2007). April 17-20, 2007. pp. 649-663.
[11] Scott, B. and Calabrese, M. Measuring the TV “White
Space” Available for Unlicensed Wireless Broadband. New
America Foundation Policy Paper. November 18, 2005.
http://www.newamerica.net/files/archive/Doc_File_2713_1.p
df .
[12] Brown, T.X. and Sicker, D.C. Can Cognitive Radio Support
Broadband Wireless Access? 2nd International IEEE
Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access
Networks (DySPAN 2007). April 17-20, 2007. pp. 123-132.
[13] Ganapati, P. FCC White Spaces Decision Kicks Off the Next
Wireless Revolution. Wired. November 5, 2008.
http://blog.wired.com/gadgets/2008/11/fccs-decision-t.html.
[14] Tonmukayakul, A. and Weiss, M. A study of secondary
spectrum use using agent-based computational economics.
Netnomics 2009 (forthcoming).

