The Value of Public Sector Information as a Strategic Resource to Civil
Society Organizations’ in South Africa: Evidence from the Fight to
Eradicate Poverty
Background and Rationale
The public sector in most countries is the
biggest single producer and owner of a large
variety of information. Governments create,
collect, manage, and store vast quantities of
data and information and increasingly try to
disseminate much of it online (see Steinberg
& Mayo, 2007). The data and information
that are produced by and for public sector
bodies include, for example, health and
education data, geographic data, financial
reports, social and economic statistics,
legislation and judicial proceedings, food and
water resources data, and many other kinds of
data and information, collectively referred to
as Public Sector Information (PSI). Given the
special characteristics of the PSI (e.g.,
comprehensiveness, reliability, timeliness,
and accuracy), this information is considered
by different stakeholders to have economic,
social, and political values (Uhlir, 2004; Abd
Hadi & McBride, 2000; Sheriff, 2000;
Young, 1992).
These information resources are used broadly
by public-sector organizations themselves,
through intra- and inter-governmental
exchange of information (see Sheriff, 2000;
Abd Hadi & McBride, 2000); by privatesector companies in general and by
information industry firms in particular as reusers, to use it in their operations or to
produce value-added information products
and services (Abd Hadi & McBride, 2000;
Young, 1992); by scientific communities
(e.g., employment information is now used
extensively in the social sciences and in
policy making; and data from public health
organizations play a growing role in the
advancement of life sciences) (see Arzberger
et al., 2004) ; by individual users (e.g., for
health and educational purposes and for
making social and economic decisions); and
by civil society organizations (e.g., the use of

geospatial data, economic statistics, health
and education information for poverty
mapping and other related activities) (see
CIESIN, 2006).
Problem Statement
In the last two decades or so, the countries in
the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) have engaged in
serious policy discussions about access to and
use of PSI, and its potential impact on
societies’ socioeconomic development. But
little scientific research has been done to
produce empirical evidence about access to
and utilization of the PSI and its
socioeconomic value and benefits to the
communities using it. Furthermore, most of
these discussions and activities were
primarily focused on the commercial use of
PSI by industry or in some cases by
governments. None of these efforts and
studies has ever examined the noncommercial use of PSI, especially its
utilization by Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs), and its impact on their effectiveness
and innovativeness. Moreover, with only a
few exceptions, discussions of the importance
of PSI and efforts to take advantage of this
strategic resource are almost absent in the
developing world and the PSI-related
literatures. This is very ironic given that PSI
can be of special importance to these
countries, especially in their fight against
poverty, in the public health and in other
socioeconomic problems.
South Africa is one of the exceptions, where a
number of strategic steps have been taken
after the historic transformation of the country
to a democratic state in 1994 to make more
PSI available to the public and to encourage
different groups of the South African society
to use and maximize the value of this
information. This makes South Africa a

unique case for the study of the importance
and value of PSI in the developing world,
given that very few developing countries have
taken similar steps to make their information
more openly available to the public.
Furthermore, almost all of the pressing
socioeconomic problems in the developing
world are present in South Africa, which
makes any empirical evidence about the value
of PSI to socioeconomic development in this
country applicable to other developing
nations.
Research Purpose and Questions
The main purpose of this dissertation research
is to investigate whether, and if so how, PSI is
utilized by the South African CSOs to add
value to their efforts to eradicate poverty.
Employing a mixed-method, multiple case
study approach (Yin, 2003), I draw upon
literature from the fields of economics of
information and organizational studies. The
concepts of value of information (Parker and
Houghton, 1994), management of external
knowledge (Sammons, 2005), absorptive
capacity (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Zahra &
George, 2002), organizational learning
(Argyris
and
Schön,
1978),
and
organizational innovation (March & Simons,
1958) will be used to guide my inquiry to
demonstrate the value of PSI to South African
CSOs through describing and explaining the
CSOs processes to identify, acquire
(including factors that can facilitate or hinder
access and acquisition of the PSI; e.g.,
technical, legal, economic and institutional
barriers.), assimilate, transform and exploit
this strategic resource. The organizational
conditions for successful utilization of the PSI
will be identified as well. More specifically,
the study has three objectives:

-

-

-

Identifying and documenting successful
approaches and mechanisms: the research
will develop more systematic knowledge
about the successful approaches and
mechanisms that CSOs follow to utilize
PSI and add value to their work in the
poverty reduction area.
Building a knowledge base of the
successful utilization processes: the
research will identify and document the
variables,
relationships,
problems,
patterns, opportunities and conditions
involved in the processes of successful
utilization of the PSI to gain better
understanding of what works and what
doesn’t work in these processes.
Sharing approaches that work: to provide
a series of “tried and tested” transferable
approaches and mechanisms of successful
utilization of PSI as a means of helping
and educating similar CSOs in the poverty
reduction area and other similar areas.

To that end, the main research question of my
dissertation is:
To what extent and in what ways is PSI
utilized to add value to South African CSOs
efforts to eradicate poverty?
The study will begin by identifying what
types of PSI are being used by the relevant
population of South African CSOs, and for
what purposes. It will then answer the
following questions:
1- What characteristics and conditions of
the PSI facilitate or hinder its
acquisition and assimilation?
2- What organizational conditions enable
successful exploitation of PSI by the
CSOs?

Figure 1:Study Conceptual Framework
Internal Factors:
67%)7 7-0/(-8 9*):0-82-;-<=-7%-*"5*(-7*/0 4-"./*%&4&

CSOs9 Absorpti=e Capacit?
New$
External
Information
(PSI)

Potential
!"#$%&%
'(%)*

RealiDeE
!&&%4%'
0/(%)*

,7/*&>)7'
4/(%)*

3<=0)%'
(/(%)*

CSOs New$
Inno=ati=e
Acti=ities,
Ser=ices,
Publications,
etc H

External Factors: PSI Barriers
•,-".*%"/0
•1-2/0
•3")*)4%"
•5*&(%($(%)*/0
As shown in figure 1, the study adopts
Zahara & George (2002) reconceptualized
version of the absorptive capacity
construct, which is defined as the
organization’s ability to recognize the value
of new external knowledge, assimilate it
and apply it to commercial ends (Cohen &
Levinthal,
1990).
In
their
reconceptualization, Zahra & George
(2002) introduced a “transformation” stage
to the construct and distinguished between
an organization’s “potential capacity”,
defined as the ability to acquire and
assimilate external knowledge; and the its
“realized capacity”, defined as the ability to
transform and exploit external knowledge.
I argue that the absorptive capacity
construct and its links to organizational
learning and organizational innovation
literatures provides a comprehensive
framework to describe and explain the
processes of PSI utilization by the CSOs
(i.e., acquire, assimilate, transform, and

exploit the PSI) and will help in identifying
the organizational conditions for successful
exploitation of this strategic resource.
Methodology
I am interested in understanding the
processes by which the South African
CSOs utilize PSI to add value to their
efforts to eradicate poverty. Thus, I need to
develop a close, empirical understanding of
the conditions, variables, and relationships
involved in these processes. I need to
understand why and how the PSI is
recognized to have value for CSOs’ work,
what are the characteristics and conditions
of the PSI that can facilitate or hinder these
processes, and finally, what are the
organizational conditions for successful
utilization of such a strategic resource. In
order to shed a light on these issues, I will
use a mixed-method, multi-phase study of
several cases. I will collect both
quantitative and qualitative data through

document review, surveys and fieldwork in
the form of in-depth semi-structured
interviews. This will allow me to acquire a
richer understanding of these processes
within the CSOs context. Also, the use of
multiple methods will allow me to get
various types of data to answer my research
questions (Tashakkori & Teddlie, 1998).
The case study approach (Yin, 1984) is
considered to be one of the powerful and
frequently used research methods in social
science, sociology, and social work
(Gilgun, 1994). The use of case study
method is well-recognized for studies
where the context is important (Yin, 2003).
This method “seeks to understand the
problem being investigated … and provides
an opportunity to delve into issues for
richness; to understand the nature and
complexity of a given phenomenon that is
contemporary and not yet thoroughly
researched” (Yin, 1984, p. 13). The
advantage of following the case study
approach for this study is that I can capture
and understand the distinctive variables and
relationships involved in the processes of
utilizing the PSI by the South African
CSOs. If I don’t use these multiple methods
under the case study umbrella, I might not
be able to be a full picture of these
processes and I might be missing some
important aspects of it.
Significance and Expected Contributions
It is expected that the discussions and
findings of this study will have practical
and theoretical contributions, and will
greatly contribute to bridging some of the
gaps in the related literatures.
Although there appears to be broad
recognition by different stakeholders of the
key role that PSI can play in the
socioeconomic development of societies,
yet there are significant gaps in our
understanding of how PSI is actually
utilized
by
different
communities,
especially for non-commercial purposes by

CSOs. There is also little systematic
analysis of PSI’s socioeconomic value and
impact on societies. The lack of
comprehensive, detailed empirical data and
systematic research applies especially to
PSI disseminated online in both the
developed and the less economically
developed regions.
However, the need to conduct such studies
in the developing countries, in my opinion,
is much more critical and needed because,
in addition to its expected value to the
creation of innovative products and
services, increasing employment and
generating considerable revenues (similar
to the situation in some OECD countries),
PSI has a great potential to address
fundamental development problems in the
developing world such as poverty, public
health and environmental issues.
It is expected that the findings of this study
will provide policy makers in South Africa,
as well as in other developing countries,
with evidence about the value of making
more PSI easily and freely available,
especially online. It will also shed some
light on the problems resulting from putting
barriers to this resource, hoping that this
will help improve or rationalize their
policies. It is also expected that this
evidence will motivate other CSOs working
in the poverty reduction and other
development areas to take full advantage of
the available PSI. Moreover, the findings of
this research could have some implications
for funding agencies and international
organizations working in the poverty
reduction area, especially by encouraging
them to explore the ways by which they can
build CSOs internal capacities, so these
organizations become better prepared to
take full advantage of the available PSI.
Also, answers to the study questions will
contribute to filling some theoretical and
methodological gaps in the related
literatures. In the PSI area, the main
theoretical and methodological contribution

of this study will be the application of
organizational studies theories and concepts
(i.e., absorptive capacity, organizational
learning and innovation) to the study and
understanding
of
PSI
value
and
contribution to societies. Among the main
observations of the OECD-US National
Academies workshop on “Measuring the
Social and Economic Cost and Benefits of
Access to and Use of Public Sector
Information” (2008) were: (1) the lack of
strong theoretical foundation and robust
data collection approaches in the study of
the social and economic value of PSI; and
(2) the insufficient multidisciplinary or
multidimensional studies in this area. To
that end, the workshop emphasized the
need to promote and facilitate more
academically-focused research that is
informed by well-established theories and
methodologies
(OECD-US
National
Academies, 2008). Furthermore, in their
article titled “Access to Public Sector
Information in Europe: Policy, Rights and
Obligations”, Blakemore & Craglia (2006)
discussed some explanatory perspectives
that could be adopted for the analysis of
PSI policy, rights and obligations. These
approaches were: organizational theory,
actor-network theory, the postmodernist
work of Foucault focusing on power
relations, and the economic approach. The
authors concluded that “ at the end of
discussion, we are still grappling with the
theoretical models applicable to digital
information that link rights to citizen
obligations and to the responsibilities of
government” (p.21).
Also, this study
focuses on the user rather than the producer
perspective on access to and use of the PSI.
This is consistent with Blakemore and
Craglia (2006) proposal that “the focus of
the PSI debate needs, first and foremost, to
move away from an agenda articulated
primarily through the power of the PSI
producers, and more toward an agenda that
is clearly based on the citizen/consumer

needs, but also where the agenda is
mediated by the need to identify resources
that will maintain the quality of PSI”(p.20)
(see also summary of the OECD-US
National Academies workshop, 2008).
The study is also expected to fill some gaps
in the field of organizational studies,
especially in the area of absorptive
capacity. Fosfuri et al. (2008) argue that
while much research has been conducted
about the absorptive capacity of
organizations; the link between external
knowledge and organizational performance
hasn’t been studied enough. Also, Lane et
al. (2002), who reviewed about 180 papers
that cited Cohen & Levinthal (1990),
emphasize that not only that the lack of a
direct empirical measure of absorptive
capacity caused some problems with the
comparability of research results, it has also
led to little research “on the process by
which absorptive capacity is developed”
(p.5). Furthermore, Veugelers (1997) called
for more work “to identify specific firm
characteristics generating this absorptive
capacity” (p.314).
The study of PSI as a source of external
knowledge to South African CSOs offers a
unique opportunity to investigate this
theme of research. Given the special
characteristics (e.g., diversity in types,
volumes, sources, formats, accuracy,
timeliness, etc) and conditions (e.g.,
technical, economic, legal and institutional
barriers) of the PSI; and given the assumed
potential value of the PSI to the work of
these organizations, I argue that the
absorptive capacity construct and its links
to
organizational
learning
and
organizational
innovation
literatures
provides a comprehensive framework to
describe and explain the processes of PSI
utilization by the CSOs and will help in
identifying the organizational condition for
successful exploitation of this strategic
resource.

Keywords: public sector information, civil
society organizations, poverty reduction,
socioeconomic development, absorptive
capacity.
References
Abd Hadi, Z., and McBride, N. (2000). The
commercialization of public sector
information within UK government
departments. The Journal of Public
Sector Management, 13 (7), p. 552-70.
Argyris, C. and Schon, D. (1978).
Organizational Learning: A Theory of
Action Perspective. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Arzberger, et al. (2004). Promoting Access to
Public Research Data for Science,
Economic, and Social Development.
Data Science Journal, CODATA, p.135152.
Blakemore, M. and Cragila, C. (2006). Access
to Public Sector Information in Europe:
Policy, Rights and Obligations. The
Information Society, 22:13-24.
CIESIN (Center for International Earth Science
Information Network), Columbia
University. 2006. Where the Poor Are:
An Atlas of Poverty. Palisades, NY:
Columbia University. Available at:
http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/povmap/.

Cohen,W. M., and Levinthal, D. A., (1990).
Absorptive Capacity: A new perspective
on learning and innovation.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1),
128-152
Gilgun, J. F. (1994). Hand into glove: The grounded
theory approach and social work practice
research. In E. Sherman & W. J. Reid (Eds.),
Qualitative research in social work (pp. 115–
125). New York: Columbia University Press.

Fosfuri, A. and Tibo, J. A. (2008). Exploring
the antecedents of potential absorptive
capacity and its impact on innovation
performance. Omega, (36) 173-187.
Lane, P. J., Koka, B., and Pathak, S. (2002). A
thematic analysis and critical assessment
of absorptive capacity research.
Academy of Management Proceedings.
March, J. G. and Simon, H. A. (1958).
Organizations. John Wiley & Sons

OECD- U.S. National Academies
Summary Report (Forthcoming).
Workshop on Measuring the
Social and Economic Cost and
Benefits of Access to and Use of
Public Sector Information (PSI).
Paris, France. Feb. 4-5, 2008.
Parker, J. and Houghton, J. (1994). The
value of information: paradigms
and Perspectives. Paper
presented at 57th Annual
Meeting of the American Society
for Information Science,
Alexandria, VA, Learned
Information, Inc.
Sammons, P. A. (2005). Buying Knowledge:
Effective Acquisition of External
Knowledge. Gower Publishing, Ltd.,
Sheriff, M. (2000). The value of information in
organizations: a study of information use
situations as context of value.
Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, London
School of Economics.
Tashakkori,A., & Teddlie,C. (1998). Mixed
Methodology: Combining Qualitative and
Quantitative Approaches (vol.46). Thousand
Oaks, California: Sage Publications.

Uhlir, P. (2004). Policy Guidelines for the
Development and Promotion of
Governmental Public Domain
Information. UNESCO, Paris. Accessed
Sept. 10, 2008 at
http://portal.unesco.org/ci/en/ev.phpURL_ID=15863&U
RL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html/.

Veugelers, R. (1997). Internal R&D
expenditures and external technology
sourcing. Research Policy (26) 303-315.
Young, R. H. (1992). The tradable information
initiative. In Heywood, I. & Hudson,
J.K. (Eds), Geographical Information
1993-Year Book of the Association of
Geographic Information, Taylor and
Francici, London, pp.231-238.
Zahra, S. A., and George, G. (2002).
Absorptive Capacity: A review,
reconceptualization, and extension.
Academy of Management Review, 27
(2), 185-203.
Yin, R. (2003). Case Study Research, 3rd ed.
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Yin, R. (2003). Case Study Research, 3rd ed.
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.

