The emergence of information in biology: common
principles in the evolution of organization
Daniel Thomas Wright
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820
ABSTRACT
Information organization and management are commonly
understood to be the products of conscious processes undertaken by human beings. While not incorrect, this view is
narrow and excludes a wide range of natural, evolved informational mechanisms in biological systems. The creation of
human information organization systems that can exercise
a degree of autonomy in interactions with the world – so
that they can be flexible and adapt to changing conditions
– would benefit from an understanding of the biological information systems that do this. By broadening our view of
information organization to include these natural systems,
we stand to gain a deeper understanding of both principles
of information organization and the natural world.

1.

INTRODUCTION

In LIS, systems of information organization are human designed and human implemented, and are often understood
to be synonymous with classification systems. This is true
across all sorts of technologies, from classical library classifications like the Decimal Classification (DC), to new systems
like user-driven tagging. All these systems of information
organization have a historical and collective developmental
trajectory. Likewise, the informational systems of organisms, such as the genetic code and neurological systems, are
evolved systems and as such have a historical, developmental trajectory. Understanding the evolutionary principles
and possible trajectories of these systems will contribute to
our understanding of human designed systems by presenting a much more general picture of the essential features of
functional information systems.
Human designed, artificial information organization systems
are a product of the underlying human biological constraints,
and depend on language and culture for their existence.
They have varying levels of rigidity, from the formal specifications of DC systems to the more organic, evolutionary
nature of folksonomies and on-line user tagging-based collections. While the latter seem to have more obviously in

common with the biological systems described above, in that
they demonstrate some of the same self-organizing evolutionary properties, they are not founded on an understanding of the underlying principles and have been criticized as
lacking real-world utility. The contrasts between these and
the formal systems may be informative; and in the same way,
the contrasts and similarities between all of these may reveal
fundamental constraints and principles around the whole
space of solutions to the information organization problem.
We have observed the following properties of information organization systems, and take them as assumptions grounding the discussion that follows. First, it is clear that the
organization of information is inherently a balance between
dynamic and stable properties, in that an organization system needs to be able to accommodate innovation and reflect change in its environment, while still having enduring
utility. Second, information organization appears in many
different contexts: at a biological level, organisms use organization to real, adaptive, functional advantage; formal
classifications are used throughout LIS; and informal information organization systems are found everywhere around
us. Third, information organization is clearly an emergent
phenomena – it hasn’t “always been there”, but has emerged
many times in many contexts, ranging from evolved organization in biology to engineered systems in LIS. In all cases,
organization emerges in response to some need, and emerges
as a collective phenomena. Finally, evidence from evolutionary genetics and from investigations of abstract models of
language strongly suggests that information organizations
of high dynamic complexity and robustness can evolve naturally – without planning or intent.

2.

WHAT IS BIOLOGICAL INFORMATION
ORGANIZATION?

Examples of biological information organization include the
most fundamental cellular systems like the organization of
the genome, to the most complex products of biological information – those of language and culture 1 . Biological information self-organizes in many ways. These systems of
organized information have been implicated as the crucial
developments in the evolution of higher organisms capable
of coordinated action and complex communications [4].
In the genome, organization is exhibited in gene ordering,
clustering of related genes, and the structure of coding and
1
By which I simply mean that culture and language are
necessarily constrained by, and outcomes of, human biology.

non-coding material in the genome. These properties exist
for a variety of functional reasons; for example, co-located
genes are able to be processed and expressed more rapidly
by the cell. Genome organizations have great consistencies
across a wide range of organismal classes [1], indicating that
they are functionally important, and were a relatively early
evolutionary development.

attack this problem, beginning with a theoretical account
and computer model of the emergence of heritary information in primitive biology. Elaborating the essential, abstract
features of biological self-organizing information systems is
a required first step in modeling. Our goal is to do this, to
contribute to our understanding of the fundamental principles behind information organization.

Two of the most significant products of biological complexity
are human language and culture. Language may be thought
of as a structured system of information, used both for communication and the organization of information. It is the
product of certain aspects of biological evolution, like the human brain and complex vocal apparatus. Additionally, language itself is a constantly evolving communal phenomena,
and the communicative and organizational aspects of language are mutually reinforcing and constantly evolving. It
exhibits its own characteristic evolutionary dynamics, while
having much in common with other aspects of biological
organization. Language is necessary for the existence of culture and society, and enables the development and specification our artificial systems of organization and classification.

5.

3.

INFORMATION EMERGENCE

The evolution of informational systems in biology is a problem of emergent information and semantics: starting from
abiotic chemistry, how did we get to having representational
and communicative information? At the molecular level, one
of the earliest and most obvious examples is the question of
the evolution of the genetic code. The range of emergent
information systems spans all areas of biology, from the earliest molecular systems through modern human language.
A question of great interest in this context is: what are the
common principles behind the evolution of these systems of
information representation and organization?
One way of getting at these common principles is to build abstractions from their essential features for computer modeling. To this end, we can develop simplified model organisms,
and investigate ways that they are able to bootstrap their
own semantics and information structures. We know that
both organisms and human-developed organization systems
must be able to adapt to changing demands throughout their
life-cycles; the problem of engineering the accommodation
of all contingencies into systems at their inception is clearly
intractable [2], so instead we want to address this problem
by creating systems able to learn and adapt. Investigations
into the evolution of artificial languages have demonstrated
that relatively complex representational and semantic systems can be evolved autonomously [3]. This suggests that
it is reasonable to think that building software systems able
to evolve and use their own organizational principles and
content is a practical goal.

4.

CONCLUSION

The creation of human information organization systems
that can exercise a degree of autonomy in their interaction
with the world – so that they can be flexible and adapt to
changing conditions – is an enterprise that will benefit from
an understanding of principles of the biological information
systems that are already able to do this. Research into these
principles is required, as we currently have only a very highlevel, abstract picture of what they might be. We plan to

REFERENCES

[1] E. V. Koonin and Y. I. Wolf. Genomics of bacteria and
archaea: the emerging dynamic view of the prokaryotic
world. Nucleic Acids Research, 36(21):6688–6719, 2008.
[2] H. A. Olson. Mapping beyond dewey’s boundaries:
Constructing classificatory space for marginalized
knowledge domains. Library Trends, 47(2):233–254,
1998.
[3] S. Swarup and L. Gasser. Simple, but not too simple:
Learnability vs. functionality in language evolution. In
The Seventh Evolution of Language Conference
(EvoLang’08), 11–15 March 2008.
[4] E. Szathmary and J. Maynard-Smith. The major
evolutionary transitions. Nature, 374:227–232, 16
March 1995.

