Tracking “Change”: The Importance of Applying Version
Control to Government Resources
Shannon N. Simmons

Justin M. Grimes

Elizabeth M. Bonsignore

Center for Information Policy
and E-Government
College of Information Studies,
University of Maryland
4105 Hornbake Building
College Park, MD 20742-4343

Center for Information Policy
and E-Government
College of Information Studies,
University of Maryland
4105 Hornbake Building
College Park, MD 20742-4343

simmons5@umd.edu

jgrimes2@umd.edu

Maryland Institute for
Technology in the Humanities
Center for Advanced Study of
Communities and Information
College of Information Studies,
University of Maryland
4105 Hornbake Building
College Park, MD 20742-4343

ebonsign@umd.edu
ABSTRACT
Transparency and information access are crucial components
of a successful democratic society. President-elect Obama
has pledged to use all available technologies to make the
government more transparent and accountable to its citizens. Version control provides a perfect example of one such
technology which is useful for fostering accountability, increasing public confidence, and encouraging participation.
However, as a new technology, the design and implementation of version control raises important issues of public
policy.
Version control helps track and manage changes in the process of digital information. Version control, also referred to
as revision control, exists to manage this in a structured, efficient manner through the collocation and management of
the same unit of information in a digital document. It is in
essence, the “art of managing changes to information” [6].
This idea is not a radically new concept and has existed in
the software development community for years, invented to
handle issues arising from multiple developers working on
source code at the same time. Version control is not unique
to software development; in fact, version control has been
successfully extended across other industry and academic
workflow applications, and now exists as a fairly common
concept in the modern world (examples include Microsoft
Word’s “Track Changes” tool at the document level or a content management system at the networked repository level).
Applying open access version control techniques to government resources can provide several benefits: improved efficiencies, increased access to information, increased participation, and preservation of governance processes and arti-

facts. Resources for information production and exchange
must be available, easily accessible and open for all to ensure the networked economy of the 21st century will flourish
[3]. Many scholars have argued the importance of information access to society and the democratic process [2, 1, 4, 9,
11, 12, 17]. Version control techniques would enhance both
information access and the democratic process.
Opening version control to the public sphere to support
the management of government documents in general and
e-government in particular can increase efficiency, improve
government decision-making and dissemination processes,
but most importantly, provide transparency. The federal
government generates massive amounts of information and
managing that government information is, in turn, a very
complex process. Just as version control tools supported
rapid development/test cycles, improved quality control, team
dynamics and decision-making in the software engineering
realm, parallel arguments can be made in favor of the use of
version control to support participatory governance activities ranging from increased access to government documents
to the collaborative creation of legal codes.
For the citizens and the general public, open access version control opens windows in terms of access to government information. Instead of seeing the final form, citizens
would see the entire process. Version control would allow
constituents to hold legislative body accountable; the entire legislative process of collaboratively writing and constructing documents could become more efficient, effective
and productive. Researchers, librarians, citizens and other
vested stakeholders have argued that version control would
add value, as it would increase access to and the preservation
of information [13, 19].
It has been said that “Laws are like sausages, it is better
not to see them made”. The irony of this famous Otto Von
Bismark quote is that, much like sausages, it is not the theoretical process, but the transformation of the product itself, that disturbs people. This current Prussian approach
is counterintuitive: if people find the process disturbing, we
should not hide the process, but use the opportunity to make
a more appealing sausage. If as U.S. Supreme Court Jus-

tice Louis Brandeis said “Sunlight is the best disinfectant”,
then version control would be a magnifying lens. However,
two questions remain when discussing the implementation
of a version control system: what is the level of information
granularity and what is the depth of usage and breadth of
usability.
Information granularity exists on a sliding scale. Version
control can exist at the macro or document level, answering
the question: what version of the document is this? While
this approach can increase users’ certainty that they are
working on the most current version of a document, the
real advantage of version control can be seen at the micro
level. Micro level version control enables the tracking of
atomic bits of the document including sentences, words and
ideas, and overall document structure as these items are negotiated throughout the writing process. This information
is just as essential, yet void if the granularity is set at the
macro document level.
The usage problem, simply stated, is that version control
only works if everyone uses it. The value is lost if changes
are not handled by the system. Therefore, from a design perspective, version control should be required and automated
for all users at every level. Furthermore, on the issue of usage, the ability to view and track changes must be intuitive
and easy to discern on the part of the end user.
The case for the application of version control to government documents and e-government can be best illustrated
through the following examples: Congressional legislation
and President Elect Obama’s change.gov website.
Congressional legislation
Version control for legislative information systems has been
long argued for by government outsiders such as Karl Fogel
and Tim O’Reilly and many nonprofit organizations [5, 15].
Applying version control systems and techniques to legislation would provide a wealth of advantages to a multitude
of stakeholders. Version control would bring greater transparency, openness and accountability to the legislative process. Every piece of text from legislative documents would
be trackable and traceable, leaving Congress no place to hide
text anonymously. This type of system could have solved the
problem of anonymous earmarks, which was only recently
taken care of through legislative reforms.
Change.gov
Throughout his campaign President-elect Barack Obama
placed great emphasis on the importance of using cutting
edge technologies to create a more transparent and connected democracy and even included such statements in his
technology policy (see: http://www.barackobama.com/issues/
technology/transparent-democracy). Two days after winning
the presidential election, Obama launched change.gov, which
serves as an official source of information on the on news,
events and announcements regarding the transition to an
Obama administration. While many took this as evidence
that the administration would continue to rely on the bottomup open communication principles which helped to drive
the campaign, some were quick to point out that within

days the site had taken its agenda down for revisions, replacing the content with “three broad sentences about what
Obama hopes to do” [22]. The New York Times noted that
“there was an almost instantaneous outcry from bloggers and
other advocates of transparency in government who noticed
the disappearance” [8]. Members of the blogosphere began
tracking changes themselves, which one person described as
being noticeable only to those who kept a very close eye on
the site[22]. Bloggers’ calls for a “recent changes module”
or “website as a wiki” have recently been also been backed
by Tim O’Reilly, who suggests that the Obama administration start the version control movement on change.gov to
”demonstrate that the system works, that it has enormous
benefits in transparency” [16], and use that to work toward
what he calls the ”holy grail” of providing revision control
for all government documents.
Preservation of Information
Possibly most importantly, without the use of open-access
version control, the evolution of government materials and
the processes underlying their development will be lost to
posterity. For the people, open access to the historical record,
as it is being formed and archived, can engender in them a
sense of individual agency that is the foundation of democratic ideals [14]. For scholars, open access, coupled with
emerging tools of digital humanities scholarship, would enable analysis of the process and products of governance from
multiple perspectives across time and space, across diverse
disciplines, in more intimate detail than ever before [7, 10,
18, 20, 21].
This poster will be used to discuss the potential of versioning
control and computer supported cooperative work research
towards the application of government resources and what
the next necessary steps are in terms of research.

Keywords
e-government, information policy, version control, preservation, information access

1.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Barnum. Availability, access, authenticity, and
persistence: Creating the environment for permanent
public access to electronic government information.
Government Information Quarterly, 19:37–43, 2002.
[2] G. Bass. Moving toward a 21st century right-to-know
agenda: Recommendations to president-elect obama
and congress., November 2008.
[3] Y. Benkler. The Wealth of Networks: How Social
Production Transforms Markets and Freedom. Yale
University Press, New Haven, CT, 2006.
[4] J. Brito. Hack, mash & peer: Crowdsourcing
government transparency. SSRN eLibrary, 2007.
[5] N. Cohen. Crossing out, for emphasis., July 2007.
[6] B. Collins-Sussman, B. W. Fitzpatrick, and C. M.
Pilato. Version control with Subversion. O’Reilly
Media, Sebastopol, CA, 2004.
[7] G. Crane, A. Babeu, D. Bamman, L. Cerrato, and
R. Singhal. Tools for thinking: ephilology and
cyberinfrastructure. Technical report, Council on
Library and Information Resources National

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]
[22]

Endowment for the Humanities, September 15, 2008
2008.
M. Falcone. Changes at change.gov: Return of
’agenda.’, November 2008.
Z. Fang. E-government in digital era: Concept,
practice and development. International Journal of the
Computer, the Internet and Management, 10(2):1–22,
2002.
E. Folsom. Database as genre: The epic
transformation of archives. PMLA: Publications of the
Modern Language Association of America,
122(5):1571–1579, 2007.
P. T. Jaeger. Information policy, information access,
and democratic participation: The national and
international implications of the bush
˘ Zs
´ information politics. Government
administrationˆ
aA
Information Quarterly, 24(4):840–859, 2007.
P. T. Jaeger and G. Burnett. Information access and
exchange among small worlds in a democratic society
the role of policy in shaping information behavior in
the post-9/11 united states. Library Quarterly,
75(4):464–495, 2005.
K. R. Murray and I. K. Hsieh. Archiving
web-published materials: A needs assessment of
librarians, researchers, and content providers.
Government Information Quarterly, 25(1):66–89, 2008.
M. A. Norcia. Out of the ivory tower endlessly
rocking: Collaborating across disciplines and
professions to promote student learning in the digital
archive. Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to Teaching
Literature, Language, Composition, and Culture,
8(1):91–114, 2008.
T. O’Reilly. Why congress needs a version control
system, July 2007.
T. O’Reilly. Put change.gov under revision control!,
November 2008.
A. C. Quinn. Keeping the citizenry informed: early
congressional printing and 21<sup>st</sup> century
information policy. Government Information
Quarterly, 20(3):281, 2003.
S. Schreibman, A. Kumar, and J. McDonald. The
versioning machine. Literary and Linguistic
Computing: Journal of the Association for Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 18(1):101–107, 2003.
B. Selby. Age of aquariusˆ
a the fdlp in the 21st century.
Government Information Quarterly, 25(1):38–47, 2008.
D. Smith. Textual variation and version control in the
tei. Computers and the Humanities, 33(1-2):103–112,
1999.
STOA. Stoa consortium for electronic publication in
the humanities, 2008.
M. Whitney. Change.gov pulls its agenda, November
2008.

