Traditional Knowledge Forum
and
Participation of Indigenous Peoples in the iSociety
Poster Presentation

Ulia Gosart
UCLA
Department of Information Studies
ugosart@ucla.edu

Abstract
This poster presentation envisions the initial steps in fostering indigenous e-inclusion by proposing the creation of an
intercultural, multi-disciplinary dialog between representatives of academia, indigenous communities, and policy
makers. This dialog would take the form of a Traditional Knowledge Forum and would be based upon and promote the
standards for the fair treatment of indigenous peoples as outlined in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples. The issues that will be addressed in the Forum include the protection and development of
indigenous knowledge sources, the creation of a venue for meaningful cooperation and sharing of indigenous
knowledge, and the establishment of an ethic for indigenous knowledge management.
The presentation intends to create a productive discussion among representatives of iSchools on practical steps to
launch a Traditional Knowledge Forum in the near future.

Keywords
traditional indigenous knowledge, cultural information systems, indigenous peoples, intellectual property, indigenous
e-inclusion.

1. Introduction
The iSociety is a creation of Western culture. Yet, its global character requires the commitment of nonWestern actors for its growth. Development of relations between those, engaged in the creation of global
information environments, and their counterparts from non-Western cultural settings is a challenging issue
in the future of the iSociety. One of the aspects of this process is collaboration between indigenous
peoples 1 and prospective designers of the information products that are relevant for indigenous cultural
settings.

2. The body of the paper
In observance of the Second International Decade of the World’s Indigenous Peoples 2 , and following the
standards of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 3 the main principles of
collaboration with indigenous communities include:
- non-discrimination,
- effective participation,
- respect for cultural diversity;
- emphasis on the women, children, and youth;
- effective monitoring and accountability. (UNFPII, 2004).
1

Indigenous peoples is a legal category, most broadly referring to “the living descendants of preinvasion
inhabitants of lands now dominated by others.” (S. James Anaya quoted in Rodríguez-Piñero, L. (2005).
Indigenous peoples, postcolonialism, and international law, p. 40, note 124). Each member state employs
its own standards to define populations as indigenous peoples, while following the principles of fair
treatment of indigenous peoples developed by the international community and expressed in a set of human
rights documents most prominent being The Declaration on Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2007).
2
The United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution A/RES/59/174 for a Second International
Decade on December 22, 2004. The Decade commenced on January 1, 2005.
3
The Declaration was adopted by the UN General Assembly during the 62-d Assembly session on
September 13, 2007.

The central objective behind these principles is to include indigenous peoples in the processes of designing,
implementing, and evaluating policies, resources, and programs that directly involve the well-being of
indigenous communities. (UNFPII, 2004).
Collaborative efforts between indigenous communities and academia to design information products
relevant to indigenous settings began as early as the 1980s. However, the consequences of this
collaboration were at times unexpectedly harmful to the indigenous communities. One of the saddest
examples of this harm was the creation of indigenous databases. While composed with assistance and help
from the indigenous peoples, these information resources often bore little relevance to the needs of the
communities from whom the information was taken. (Agrawal, 2002). Further, as these databases entered
the public domain, they made the knowledge expressions of indigenous communities vulnerable to
copyright infringement (WSIS, 2003, Brown, 2003).
An analysis of these efforts outlined the lack of clear understanding of the crucial issues involved in the
process of collaborative work with indigenous peoples. (The Tulalip Tribes, 2003). To clarify the issues
and to create solutions to the existing and potential problems related to indigenous traditional knowledge, a
dialog among representatives of academia, indigenous communities, and policy makers is needed. As an
initial step in the process of engaging indigenous peoples into the iSociety, such a dialog could take a form
of a Traditional Knowledge Forum. The Forum will elicit ways in which the principles of the treatment of
indigenous peoples as promoted by the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples can be
implemented within the educational practices of the iSchools.
3. Traditional Knowledge Forum will address the following issues:
Protection of Traditional Knowledge expressions
As the past experience has shown, a leading problem with the growth of information society is insuring the
protection of knowledge expressions of non-Western cultures, especially of indigenous peoples.
The following subject areas are related to this protection:
- Mechanisms for the protection of traditional indigenous knowledge: Intellectual Property system
and customary laws;
- Traditional indigenous knowledge and the public domain: danger and benefits;
- Internet and traditional indigenous knowledge: the adequacy of digital formats for the content of
indingeous knowledge expressions.
Sharing Traditional Knowledge expressions
Another related issue is the question of sharing the expressions of indigenous knowledge on the terms of
indigenous peoples. In particular:
- Practicing principles of mutual exchange and reciprocity within the educational endeavors of the
iSchools;
- Practicing principles of free and informed consent in the fields of iSchools research and
professional engagement.
Development of knowledge management ethics for future cooperative efforts
The next prospective area of development is knowledge management ethics. How can issues of intellectual
property rights, privacy, accuracy and accessibility in relation to the ethical management of indigenous
knowledge expressions be addressed in collaborative efforts between indigenous and non-indigenous actors
within the practices of the iSchools? (Mason, 1995)
Creating novel information products.
Finally, is it possible (or practical) to create information products that would both preserve the traditional
core of indigenous knowledge expressions, and provide the benefits of a Western information system for
indigenous peoples?
Who are prospective participants?

Indigenous peoples
While indigenous communities differ depending on their geo-political locations, historical backgrounds,
economic situations and social structures, representatives of indigenous communities often share a common
agenda on national and international forums. These representatives, who include activists, researchers, and
members of traditional leadership, are the key links between the communities and the outside social and
political structures. Participation of these actors is crucial to the working of the Forum; it would also be
useful for creating projects between representatives of the iSchools and indigenous communities.
Academia
Traditional indigenous knowledge is a theme of multi-disciplinary character. The stakeholders involved in
this field include researchers from a wide range of disciplines that include natural and social sciences,
professional fields of law, business and education. However, only the multi-disciplinary focus of the
iSchool can bring these diverse aspects under one umbrella of a common aim: the collaboration with
indigenous peoples and the creation of information resources for indigenous communities. The Forum is an
opportunity to bring diverse academia members together as a step toward indigenous e-inclusion.
Policy makers
Traditional indigenous knowledge is the focus of work of the World Intellectual Property Organization
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and
Folklore (IGC), among other policy insitutions involved in this field. Participation of the IGC members
including representatives to the IGC from indigenous peoples organizations, as well as policy makers and
professionals involved in the area of customary laws development will enhance relations among academia
and policy making circles with the active involvement of indigenous researchers and activists.

3. Conclusion
The poster presentation intends to create a meaningful discussion among i-conference participants on
practical steps for launching a Traditional Knowledge Forum within the realm of the iSchools educational
practices.

4. Acknowledgements
The author expresses her gratitude to Dr. Sharon Traweek for her encouragement and support in developing
the idea of the Forum, and to Dan Haley for his constructive comments on presenting the poster proposal.
5.

References

1.

Agrawal, A. (2002). Indigenous knowledge and the politics of classification. In International
Social Science Journal, 54 (173), 287-297.
Brown, M. (2003). Who owns native culture? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mason,
R.,
&
Culnan,
M.
(1995).
Ethics
of
Information
Management.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Rodríguez-Piñero, L. (2005). Indigenous peoples, postcolonialism, and international law. Oxford
University Press: Oxford, New York.
The Tulalip Tribes of Washington, (2003). Statement of the Tulalip Tribes of Washington on
Folklore, Indigenous Knowledge, and the Public Domain. In Proceedings of the
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional
Knowledge and Folklore, Fifth Session, Geneva, July 6-17, 2003,. Available online at
http://www.wipo.int/tk/en/igc/ngo/tulaliptribes.pdf
UNPFII, (2004). Second International Decade of the World’s Indigenous Peoples.. Available
online at http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/en/second.html
WSIS, (2003). Indigenous Position Paper for the World Summit on the Information Society.
Available online at http://www.unige.ch/iued/wsis/DEVDOT/02511.HTM .

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

