Whoʼs Watching Your Children?
Value Propositions in Preteen Virtual Worlds
Lisa P. Nathan1, Eric M. Meyers1, Kristene Unsworth1
1

The Information School
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington, USA

lpn [meyerse, kruns]@u.washington.edu
ABSTRACT
This poster presents a critical, values-oriented investigation of a
specific space within the online universe: shared virtual
playgrounds designed for preteens. Specifically we investigate
three preteen worlds with a focus on the sites’ technical features
designed to support value concerns (e.g. privacy, security,
obedience) and critically examine the potential influence of these
features from different stakeholder perspectives. We provide a
conceptual framework for analyzing these online environments,
drawing upon methods developed for investigating values and
information systems. Finally, the poster will outline: 1) a field
based investigation gathering designer, parent, and children’s
perceptions of preteen virtual worlds, 2) a research agenda for the
critical study of children’s virtual environments as value-laden
artifacts, and 3) implications such work may hold for software
developers, interaction designers, youth service providers, and
researchers in library and information science and humancomputer interaction.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4.1 [Computing and Society]: Public Policy Issues – ethics,
privacy, use and abuse of power, K.4.2 [Computing and Society]
Social Issues, K.8.0 [Personal computing] Games

General Terms
Design, Security, Human Factors

Keywords
Virtual worlds, Preteens, Surveillance, Values

1. INTRODUCTION
Cyber-stalker. Cyber-bully. Cyber-narc. These recently minted
terms have become part of the conversation around children’s
online interactions. As digital technologies and Web access
become ubiquitous in homes, schools, and libraries, children are
online with greater frequency and at a younger age [1]. Parents,
educators, and researchers have raised concerns about how
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Conference’09, February 8–11, 2008, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Copyright 2009 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0009…$5.00.

children interact in online space, the safety and privacy of
websites for children, and the difficulties of providing ageappropriate play and learning opportunities for connected youth
[2,3,4]. This poster presents a critical, values-oriented
investigation of a specific space within the online universe:
shared virtual playgrounds designed for preteens. Specifically we
investigate three preteen worlds with a focus on the sites’
technical features designed to support value concerns (e.g.
privacy, security, obedience) and critically examine the potential
influence of these features from different stakeholder
perspectives. We provide a conceptual framework for analyzing
these online environments, drawing upon methods from Value
Sensitive Design [5] and inspired by work to envision the longterm influence of information systems [6]. Finally, the poster
outlines: 1) a field based investigation gathering designer, parent,
and children’s perceptions of preteen virtual worlds; 2) a research
agenda for the critical study of children’s virtual environments as
value-laden artifacts; and 3) implications such work may hold for
software developers, interaction designers, youth service
providers, and researchers in library and information science and
human-computer interaction

2. TENSION ON THE VIRTUAL
PLAYGROUND
The preteen years are a key developmental period during which
children build their personal and social identity [7]. Targeted to
attract children ages 6-12, avatar-based playgrounds such as Club
Penguin (clubpenguin.com), Webkinz (webkinz.com), and
WoogiWorld (woogiworld.com) offer multi-player games,
interactive adventures, and monitored chat environments. These
sites claim to offer age-appropriate social activities with design
features that ensure safety and privacy. Descriptive information
aimed at parents suggests that the virtual world activities offer
skill-building opportunities for players (e.g., spelling, reading,
budgeting money, caring for pets, and getting along with others).
Parents and child advocates have nonetheless challenged the
suitability of these online spaces, and further suggest that these
sites may negatively alter real-life pro-social development [8,9].
Designers of the preteen environments have attempted to be
responsive to parental concerns. Sites use specific design features
and strong prohibitory language as strategies to dissuade and
prevent children from sharing of potentially inappropriate
information. Yet, what is inappropriate information or deviant
behavior? Is there a cost to this type of labeling? For example,
Webkinz informs parents that within their KinzChat area, “We
control everything the users are able to say…” [10]. Sites also
strongly encourage peer surveillance and immediate reporting in
order to prevent deviant behavior. The sites claim to “kick out”

members whose peers have reported them for inappropriate
behavior. In reaction to the tightly controlled environment, some
users rebel against the system. For example, there are young
users who glorify cheating Club Penguin’s reward system,
publishing their rebellious exploits on blogs and YouTube [11].
Are online environments with an ethos of monitor and control
beneficial to preteen children? Critical examinations of
surveillance practices question the policing effects of a panopticon
society. Yet when we consider the role of the family, educational
institutions, and churches in the social and moral development of
children, we must acknowledge the positive, if not necessary,
effects of such prescriptive agencies. Moral behavior is modeled
to children through their interactions with these types of
institutions. The watchful eye of the instructor, parent, teacher or
clergy is a powerful tool. Children learn through these means to
monitor themselves. Foucault explored the importance of
“knowing oneself” and “care of the self” as a foundational task in
the development of ethical conduct in society [12]. At some point
the lessons learned from social institutions (including the family)
must be put to the test through self-reflection as well as trial and
error. A society that is centered on surveillance misses the point of
teaching self-governance and discipline. The point is not for
surveillance to become ubiquitous but rather, through social
institutions and interactions to employ an internal overseer in each
and every one of us [13]. Foucault’s position is that surveillance
works best when it is directed inward. Whether or not one
follows Foucault’s logic, this line of critical thinking stirs more
questions to the surface. How does awareness of constant
surveillance affect children’s play? Are such efforts to create a
safe and secure online environment depriving children from
developing their own sense of autonomy, responsibility, and
privacy through play? How can parents, policy makers, designers,
and service providers critically assess the influence of interactions
within preteen virtual worlds on children’s social and moral
development? How are the technical features of these spaces
supporting or constraining the values of different stakeholders?

3. CONCEPTUAL INVESTIGATION:
PENGUINS, WEBKINZ, & WOOGIS
In order to shed light on the above questions, this project initiates
a conceptual investigation into the value propositions found
within three preteen virtual spaces. We are using the term
conceptual investigation in the mode of Value Sensitive Design
[5]. This type of investigation systematically identifies the
stakeholders affected, values implicated, and tensions that develop
through use of an information technology. The project builds on
nascent empirical work in this area [14], and follows in the
tradition of earlier conceptual explorations of values in teen game
design [15,16]. However, the project is particularly interested in
thinking critically about the long-term influence of information
systems on children’s social and moral development [6].
Brief descriptions of the three sites are provided below. Due to
space constraints, after each description we provide a short,
representative narrative of how one common design feature (chat),
is presented to one stakeholder group (parents), to address one
value concern (safety). Thus, each overview describes how that
particular site conceptualizes and attempts to manifest the value of
safety for arguably the most powerful stakeholder group, the
parents.

3.1 Club Penguin
Club Penguin is a virtual playground employing the metaphor of
the Antarctic where children are encouraged to “waddle around
and make new friends.” Children register with the site to engage
in activities as anthropomorphic penguins in an animated snowcovered community of shops, games, and activity spaces.
Children can perform tasks in the community (making pizzas at
the pizzeria, unloading coffee beans at the café, and of course,
rounding up puffles) in order to earn virtual currency (“coins”).
They use this currency to purchase clothing, pets, and accessories
for their penguin avatars and to decorate their “igloo” or private
online space. Children can create friend lists and chat with other
penguins via a simple dashboard interface. Adult moderators
monitor chat, and will penalize or eject children who violate the
chat guidelines.
Although an explicit definition of safety is not provided, Club
Penguin explicitly and prominently addresses safety concerns
with a description on the parent page of chat limitations.
“Ultimate Safe Chat limits what users can say to a predefined
menu of greetings, questions and statements, as well as emotes,
actions and greeting cards. When it comes to chatting, these users
can only see other Ultimate Safe Chat messages” [17]. Thus,
within Club Penguin’s Ultimate Safe Chat, the value of safety is
threatened by conversations in which either children or adults
reveal inappropriate information. Since Club Penguin is unable to
control who is in the space, they let everyone in, but totally
control what is said. Safety is “realized” through total control by
the features themselves.

3.2 Woogi World
According to the storyline behind WoogiWorld, the Woogis are
an advanced alien race corrupted by excessive online time without
careful monitoring. The children of Earth can help the Woogis by
adopting them, and teaching them appropriate activities and
limits. In WoogiWorld, children control a Woogi character,
perform tasks, play games, and earn virtual currency (“Woogi
Watts”), which they can use to decorate their “wigwams” or
accessorize their adopted Woogi avatars. Virtual activity spaces
are learning oriented, and include a science lab, savings bank, and
a library. Children are also provided incentives for off-line
activities, including chores and playing board games with family
members. A simple, adult monitored chat interface is provided,
and several games are designed as social, multiplayer experiences.
WoogiWorld describes its goals on the site’s front page: “teaching
kids Internet safety, life values, and fun.” By far the most radical
in terms of moral stance, WoogiWorld includes a definition of
safety in its parents section: “A combination of appropriate
mindset and behavior validated by a community of like-minded
people” [18]. WoogiWorld, however, does not describe specific
technical features that promote safety. Instead it describes to
parents how the sites rules, standards, and regulations are
embodied by the children who are now serving as their own
moderators, in addition to the site’s adult moderators. In order to
enable chat features, Woogis (preteen participants) have to go
through a short, intense training program on appropriate and
inappropriate behavior. In WoogiWorld, once again the value of
safety is threatened by conversations in which inappropriate
information is shared. Similar to Club Penguin, WoogiWorld is
unable to control who is in the space. However, WoogiWorld
explicitly creates habits of mind by instantiating certain behavior
in certain games and activities. Thus, in addition to technical

features, WoogiWorld addresses parents concerns for safety
through developing a strong ethos of appropriate interactions
within this online space.

3.3 Webkinz
Webkinz is an online space where children care for virtual pets,
play games, answer trivia challenges, and interact with other pet
caretakers. Each plush Webkinz toy comes with a registration
code to permit a child to adopt the pet online, essentially
unlocking its “virtual” life. Once registered, children are
encouraged to login daily to care for their pet avatars by bathing
them, feeding them, and buying accessories, clothes, and furniture
with “KinzCash,” the currency awarded for successfully
completing online games and other activities. You can befriend
other pet caretakers, chat, and leave gifts for your friends and their
adopted pets.
Similar to Club Penguin, Webkinz does not provide an explicit
definition of safety, but equates safety with control of children’s
discursive practices, both what they say via chat and what they are
allowed to see of others’ chat. Parents are informed that, “In our
KinzChat area, the chat is entirely constructed. There is no way
for users to type what they want, exchange any personal
information, ask or say anything inappropriate. We control
everything the users are able to say” [10].

4. FUTURE WORK
Future work will include; 1) a field based investigation gathering
designer, parent, and children’s value perceptions of preteen
virtual worlds based on this conceptual work; 2) longitudinal data
collection with preteen children interacting with virtual worlds,
collecting their developing perspectives of how the worlds operate
and how they perceive appropriate and inappropriate behaviors in
each world; and 3) developing design criteria and
recommendations for software developers, interaction designers,
youth service providers, and parents concerned with the long-term
influence of virtual worlds on preteen social and moral
development.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning (pp. 2140). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
[5] Friedman, B., Kahn, P. H., Jr., & Borning, A. (2006). Value
Sensitive Design and information systems. In P. Zhang & D.
Galetta (Eds.), Human-computer interaction and
management information systems: Foundations (Vol. 1, pp.
348-372): M.E. Sharpe.
[6] Nathan, L.P., Friedman, B., Klasnja, P.V., Kane, S.K., &
Miller, J.K. (2008). Envisioning systemic effects of
interactive technical systems. Proceedings of the Conference
on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ‘08), 1-10, Cape
Town, South Africa.
[7] Wigfield, A., Byrnes, J. P., & Eccles, J. S. (2006).
Development during early and middle adolescence. In P. A.
Alexander, & P. H. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of educational
psychology (2nd ed.) (pp. 87-113). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
[8] Flanagan, C. (2007, July). Babes in the woods. Atlantic
Monthly, 300(1), 116-133. Retrieved 27 July, 2007, from
Academic Search Complete database.
[9] Slatalla, M. (2007, May 3). My daughter, the burger-flipping
penguin. The New York Times. Retrieved 4 May, 2007,
from
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/03/fashion/03Online.html
[10] Webkinz (2008). Parent Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ).
Accessed November 30, 2008 from:
http://www.webkinz.com/us_en/faq_parents.html
[11] Benderoff, E., 2007, Cheating a real problem in Club
Penguin's virtual world. The Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 10
April, 2008 from
http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/chi0703080167mar08,0,4256114.story
[12] Foucault, M. (1985). The history of sexuality (R. Hurley,
Trans. Vol. 2, The use of pleasure). New York: Pantheon.
[13] Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and Punish: The birth of the
prison (A. Sheridan, Trans.). New York: Vintage.

[1] Harwood, P. G., & Asal, V. (2007). Educating the first
digital generation. Westport, CT: Praeger.

[14] Meyers, E. M. (2009). Tip of the iceberg: Meaning, identity
and literacy in preteen virtual worlds. Association for
Library and Information Science Education (ALISE)
Conference. January 20-23, 2009, Denver, CO.

[2] Bogost, I. (2008). The rhetoric of video games. In K. Salen
(Ed), The ecology of games: Connecting youth, games, and
learning. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning (pp. 117140). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

[15] Flanagan, M., Howe, D. C., and Nissenbaum, H. (2005).
Values at play: Design tradeoffs in socially-oriented game
design. Proceedings of the CHI 2005 conference on Human
factors in computing systems. CHI 2005, April 2-7, 2005,
Portland, Oregon. New York: ACM Press.

[3] British Library & Joint Information Systems Committee
(JISC) (2008, 11 January). The information behavior of the
researcher of the future: A Ciber briefing paper. Retrieved
17 January 2008 from
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/reppres
/gg_final_keynote_11012008.pdf

[16] Flanagan, M., Nissenbaum, H., Diamond, J., and Belman, J.
(2007). A method for discovering values in digital games.”
DiGRA ’07 September 24-28, 2007, Tokyo, Japan.

[4] Gee, J. P. (2008). Learning and games. In K. Salen (Ed),
The ecology of games: Connecting youth, games, and
learning. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur

[18] Clare, E. M. (2008). WoogiWorld Summary for Parents.
Accessed December 5, 2008 from:
http://www.woogiworld.com/parents/index.php?articleid=1

6. REFERENCES

[17] Club Penguin (2008) Parent Page. Accessed December 2,
2008 from:
http://www.clubpenguin.com/parents/player_safety.htm

